2025 09 09  
CS 240  
Ken Rodham  
DAY TWO: JAVA


# Java Fundamentals

Different languages are good for different things. e.g. Python is good for data science, C/C++ is good for performance, memory management, and lower level stuff.

One of Java's benefits is that it is platform independent. You don't have to rewrite your program when porting it to another machine. Dope!  

## History 

- Early 1991: Green project started at Sun Microsystems.
- Tried to write a better C++ compiler.
- Late 1992: Completed Oak.
- 1993: Mosaic introduced.
- Early 1994: Green team (FirstPerson) disbanded.
- Oak renamed Java & HotJava Browser created.
- May 23, 1995: Netscap eannouncement.
- 2010: Oracle acquired sun microsystems, and Java.

(None of that matters though. You don't need to remember it.)


## Java Overview

### Comparison to C++

- Similar syntax but in many cases different semantics from C++.
- Built-in garbage collection.
    - That means memory you allocate is automagically cleared for you.
- All objects are referenced through pointers.
    - Any time you reference an object in Java, you're actually referencing a pointer to it. (Though it calls them "references".)
    - (Most newer languages are this way.)
- Data types are always the same size in Java.
- Specific boolean data type and language constructs made to use it.
- Classes dynamically linked at runtime.
- You cannot have functions outside of a class.
    - (You can simulate that with smth called "static imports".)
- Other stuff.

## Installing Java

Install the latest JDK from the Oracle website.

Java is by default a command-line tool. When you run a Java VM to run a program, you do it from the terminal. BUT for us we'll do it through our IDE (most likely through IntelliJ for this class). But just recognize that the IDE tools you're using for Java are built on top of the command line tools.

### Java IDEs

- Intellij Idea (Community Edition is free)
- Eclipse (free)
- Others

## Java Architecture

Java is a mix between compiling and interpreting.

Java source code is *compiled* into Java Byte Code. (.java &mdash; .class) (In contrast, C/C++ compile to machine code that the computer can understand directly.)

The Byte Code is *interpreted* by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) running on your computer.

The idea is that Java Byte Code is portable to any operating system that has a JVM.

The theoretical benefit is that Java can be both fast like a compiled language and portable like an interpreted language.


(Aside: Python works this way too. Python source code is compiled into "Python cache" or smth like that.)


## Anatomy of a Java Program

### File Organization

```
project/
    .idea/
    x.java
    y.java
    z.java
    bin/
        x.class
        y.class
        z.class
```

Source code exists in `.java` files in the main directory.

Every class goes in its own file (`.class`), often stored in a `bin` subfolder within the main directory. The file is named the same as the class (by default).

One class must have a `main` method.

**Typically, you won't add `.class` files to your git repo, bc you're going to be regenerating them all the time.**

If you're working w/ Intellij, you'll also have a `.idea` folder. 

### Compiling & Running

Compiling: `javac -d bin/ X.java Y.java Z.java` 

- (`-d bin/` stores the byte code files (`.class`) in a `bin` subdirectory.)
- No executable file is made. It's just a bunch of `.class` files.

Running: `java -cp bin/ X arg1 arg2 ...`

- `java` is the JVM.
- `-cp bin/`: "cp" = "class path" (directory containing `.class` files).
- `X` = name of the class w/ the `main` method.
- following args are command line arguments passed into the `main` method.

# Creating our first Java program

Doing this w/o an IDE.

```java
public class Main {

    public static void main(String[] args) {  // this is the chant that Java programmers chant around the fire.
        // "public" means other classes can find it.
        // "static" means that the function can be called without instantiating an object of the class.
        // "String[] args" is the commandline arguments passed in when the program is run.
    
        for (int i = 0; i < args.length; ++i) {
            System.out.println("args[" + i + "] = " + args[i]) // this is how you print to console. (or one way to, anyway.)
        }

    }
}
```

### For each loops

Java also has **for each loops**. The above code could have looked like this:

```
for (String a in args) {
    System.out.println(a);
}
```

But then you don't have the index of the string.


### printf

Java, like C/C++, has `printf` for printing "format strings".

e.g., we could have done `System.out.printf("%s\n", a);` above.

While we're here, note that **`println` prints a newline automatically**.

## Using Intellij

In Intellij, you can run programs by pressing the green arrow icon at the top (or the one at the side of the main class or the one at the side of the main method). OR you can also **run w/ the debugger by pressing the bug button** at the top. 

Intellij compiles `.class` files into an `out/` folder instead of a `bin/` folder.

To run a program w/ arguments, at the top (to the left of the green run arrow), click the drop-down listed w/ the project name, and then click "Modify program configuration" (or smth like that).  

# Some more insights

- Java supports argument overloading for functions.
- Variables inside a class are called "fields".
    - ALL variables are declared w/ visibility modifiers. (`public`, `private`, etc.)
- Constructors: declare a constructor by creating a method w/ the name of the class. (Just like in C++.)
- Inside classes, the `this` keyword refers to itself.
- Variables are automatically initialized if you don't do it yourself.
- When you try to print an object, the computer will look for a method called `toString` that returns a string.
    - `public String toString()`
- `String.format()`: Works like `printf`, but *returns* a formatted string instead of printing it.
- 