2025 11 04  
ENGL 202  
Courtney B


# Modernism

## 20th Century Developments

- 200M died in wars, revolutions, genocides, related famines
    - WWI
    - WWII
    - Russian Rev
    - Great Dep
    - Holocaust
    - Nuclear age
    - Cold war
- Now the idea of a peaceful world is a dream.
- Philosophers and psychologists studying the human mind. (Marx, Nietzsche, Freud)
- Scientists upending our understanding of the natural world. (Einstein's theory of relativity, etc.)
- W.E.B. Du Bois "the color line"

## Modernism

They were wondering, how do we get to peace in chaos? So in literature/art they tried to capture/create chaos.

Connected w/ stuff like realism and other Avant Garde.

### Asian Modernism

- Followed European & American developments.
    - Embraced modern Western themes and styles.
    - Blended w/ traditional Asian subject matter.
    - Embraced communist or socialist politics and a related style of political fiction.

## *A Room of One's Own* Intro

Woolf is one of the foremost writers of the modernist movement. From the introduction, then, let's learn some stuff about Woolf to glean info ab Modernism.

What themes, questions, & context stood out to you?

- Key text in feminism.
    - This text comes a decade after women got the right to vote. Hence it talks ab the backlash to that.
    - Trying to re-open the conversation of women's rights: We got the right to vote (simple discussion), but there's still growth that needs to happen (complex discussion). 
- Sexuality.
- Hyper self-awareness. Meta.
- Alienation.
- Personal finance.
    - Freedom & knowledge.
    - Creative acts.
- Modernism is a movement of creativity.
- Mental illness.
- Intro page 19: *A Room Of One's Own* centers a lot on finance and economics, to the point that Woolf in her intro(?) expresses worry that she overprioritized material stuff.
- "Not just the abundant quotations...various economic, psychological, aesthetic, and sexual reprecussions of gender, and to do so without boring her audience to distraction."
    - Courtney: Please bring the moments that are engaging to you (and those that bore you).
    - Courtney: Don't feel like you need to understand all the different allusions and stuff.
        - Courtney mentioned some professor or smth's argument that the best way to read poetry is to go in knowing nothing and letting it wash over you.


Things to watch for: 

- pg. XXXV
- pg. XXXVII
- pg. LVI
- pg. XL
    - "...so personally delineated, it serves as a...readers" 

# Neruda (*Ode to the Sea*)

The issues of Modernism is pervasive in many different cultures and places. And the writers want to write about it.

- Spanish & Indian ancestry.
- Nobel prize winner.
- Social justice advocate, eventual Senator.
- Put his poetry t othe service of people, esp after Spanish Civil War (1936).
- Shifted poetry to everyday, unadorened expression of common subject matter.
    -  *Ode to the Sea* is a later work of his.

## Discussion

ts pmo

# Briding the literary movements

COPY DOWN THIS SLIDE!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!

