2025 09 25  
ENGL 202  
Courtney Bulsiewicz  
PARADISE LOST BOOKS 1 & 2

# Paradise Lost

CRYING I missed my shuttle and didn't show up until 25 mins late.

# Student-led discussion

## Quotes

She started by sharing quotes: 

### Book 1

*"Th' infernal Serpent...To set himself in glory above his peers, He trusted to have equalled the Most High...with vain attempt"* (pp 34-44). Perhaps Satan tried at first to emulate God, but ended up opposing Him.

**So spake th' apostate angle, though in pain, vaunting aloud, but racked with deep despair: and him thus answered soon his bold compeer"* (pp. 125-127). Student never thought of Satan as having feelings of *despair*. 

**"The mind is its own place, and in itself can make a Heav'n of Hell,a Hell of Heav'n. What matter where, if I be estill the same, and what I should be, all but less than he whom thunder hath made greater?"* (pp. 254-258) *"Better to reign in Hell than serve in Heav'n"* (pp. 263).

*"There went a fame in Heav'n that he ere long intended to create"* (pp. 651-652). Student said it was interesting how Satan acted w/ intentionality.

One student said it appeared Satan felt he wasn't good enough, and he let that insecurity turn him to bitterness.

Does Satan have some good in him? The values and what he's good at are not bad attributes...they can be good or bad. He uses these characteristics in the wrong way. 

One student noted that because Satan mixes the good with the bad, it's hard to know when to believe him. e.g. Does he actually believe it's better to reign in Hell than serve in Heaven, or is he just trying to convince his companions to stay with him? Student leading the discussion bounced off of that with a quote from somewhere: "Satan doesn't need us to do bad things, he just needs us to do nothing." 

One student noted: The opposite of love is not hate, it's indifference, and Satan is not indifferent. She referenced somewhere in the textbook that said Satan is the master of his destiny but Christ is the master of his soul. Perhaps this is why he tries to be a big influence and presence is because he can't let go and be indifferent, he is compelled to seek for control.

### Book 2

*"For what place can be for us within Heav'n's bound, unless Heav'n's Lord supreme we overpower?"* (pp. 235-237)

*"Their specious deeds on earth, which glory excites, or close ambition varnished o'er with zeal"* (pp. 484-485). "Specious" = superficially plausible, but actually wrong. Student leading the discussion connected this to the student earlier who said that Satan mixes the bad with the good.

*"To her original darkness and your sway (which is my present journey) and once more erect the standard there of ancient Night; yours be th' advantage all, mine the revenge"* (pp. 985-987). i.e. saying, You can have the advantage, but mine is the revenge.


## Question & Discussion

Student leading the discussion said her question was one she has always thought of since she was a kid, and it was very apparent in this book:

**Even though Satan must know that he cannot "win", what is his purpose/goal in tempting people?**

One student said it's definitely out of revenge. He knows he can't defeat God, but if he can get God's favorite creation (humanity) to fall, that is a victory in its own right.

Another student said his goal is to reign in Hell. Thus, the more people he bring there, the more power he can assume.

Another student drew it back to Satan's insecurity about failure that a previous student mentioned. She referenced a quote: "Forever now to have their lot in pain, millions of spirits are for his fault disperesed." She posited that Satan secretly knows his failure but refuses to accept it, and so continues to sew chaos. (We're in too deep now!) Another student drew off of that, suggesting that Satan's whole thing is: "Maybe I lost, but maybe I can still convince everyone I was right."

*"To be weak is miserable...to odd good will never be our task, but to do ill will be our delight [because it opposes his power]."* If good of our bad, we'll make bad of that still.

Line 61: "War then war open or understood must be resolved." Satan knows he can't win in an open, direct war with God. But an understood war, perhaps i.e. proxy war, he thinks he can. Satan's goal in finding earth to tempt people is to use earth as a proxy war: He believes though he can't win directly fighting God, he can win a proxy war.

*"Seduce them to our party, that their God may prove their foe, and with his hand abolish his own works."* They are taking joy in taking revenge from God, not because they will take away His creation, but because they will force God to kill His creation. They want to force God to kill His own creations (which he hasn't done before bc angels were immortal).

Satan is guided by all of these different emotions. The summary for book 2 calls him an entity of chaos. Chaos is the antithesis of God Himself. While Satan knows he cannot win, maybe he thinks chaos can. (That's actually really interesting when thinking abou the Garden of Eden story, bc in ancient times when that story was written, serpents represented chaos. (I learned that in religion classes w/ Dr. Pierce lol. Great guy.))

How odd is it that we feel bad for Satan...when he's the devil? The student leading the discussion also pointed out how she kept having to remind herself that this was not actually scripture.

# *Paradise Lost*

Courtney proposed the question: Why, when choosing to write an epic that addressed political and theocratic ideas of the time, did Milton choose to use the story of Satan, the creation, and the fall?

Courtney noted how Satan has very little physical power. He can't even leave Hell without talking his way out of it. This is in stark contrast to epics of old that emphasize the hero's power.

Courtney proposed that for us seeing temptation personified makes it feel more real. One student had earlier noted her mom's reaction to when they changed one of the temple endowment's movies: "That was the first time they casted a handsome Satan!"

Another student compared *Paradise Lost* to *The Chosen*. It's an important story, but in all actuality the bible itself doesn't give us a lot. (She said she is often surprised by how short the bible stories she's heard all about actuaally are when she cracks open the book and reads them.)

Courtney says she always comes at it from a writer's perspective. How hard must it have been for Milton, to try to dive into Satan's mind?

One student noted that Milton was already blind by the time he was writing *Paradise Lost*. Everything in his book was actually orated to other peope. So perhaps he was in the right state of mind, having something of his own that he had lost and could not get back. 

Another student noted how most epics of old have a hero that is perfect...which Satan in Milton's *Paradise Lost* absolutely isn't. It's interesting because in modern days, we actually *prefer* characters who are a lot more relatable. This student then suggested where she thought the plot would go (though she hasn't read the book): We will become sympathetic for Satan, but he won't change, and in the end that will end up feeling a bit like a betrayal for us as an audience.

## Moments where Satan is cunning

*"If once they hear that voice...their sure signal they will sure resume courage. asdfasdfui pasdoif aspdf j"* (or something like that). There are so many demons ready to listen to someone&mdash;anyone, so long as someone spoke up&mdash;and Satan was perfectly positioned to be that voice.


## Milton on good vs. evil

Courtney asked: **Who is in Hell, and why are they there? What does that show about what Milton thinks is good vs. evil?**

- Evil
    - One student asked herself the question, Why are these demons in Hell with Satan? This reminded her of the Immanuel Kant stuff we read last time that criticized being a sheep following your shepherd blindly. Perhaps that's why those demons were cast to Hell along with Satan? 
    - One student noted that Milton capitalizes "Night" a few times.
    - One student said that Milton's perception of evil = going against God's will. 
    - Sage noted deception was prevalent in Satan.
    - Courtney added that inaction/slothfulness was seen a lot in the demons, too. e.g. 
- Power/injustice
- Freedom
    - Satan's whole thing in the book is that he was about freedom. Which is interested bc in our religion, God = agency.
    - Can be lost.
        - idk what quote it was but Courtney wrote this down after some student gave a quote and everyone was like "WOAH that's deep".
    - One student said that it seemed the demons' idea of freedom = not having accountability.
    - One student noted how it was interesting that we as readers know they're not actually free.
- Justice

## Why read difficult texts?

Courtney said this text is difficult to read in many ways: This is a character who is devastating to humanity, and that can be challenging. And also the way these epic poems were written is challenging to read and understand. And sometimes the violence and grotesqueness of epic poems like these are hard to consume. (She added as an aside to feel free to skip over gross lines.) Why read these kinds of texts? Why write them? She left that with us as a final thought.