2025 11 11  
ENGL 202  
Courtney B

Hello Sage >:)

# Administrative stuff

For next time's reading, you only need to reed ONE chapter of the book linked (is what I think she said).

# Discussion: Marcus?

## Quotes

"Lock up your libraries if you like; but there is no gate, no lock, no bolt that you can set upon the freedom of my mind."

"She will write in a rage where she should write calmly. She will write foolishly where she should write wisely. She will write of herself where she should write of her characters. She is at war with her lot. How could she help but die young, cramped and thwarted?"

"...it is fatal for anyone who writes to thinkn of their sex. It is fatal to be a man or woman pure and simple. One must be woman-manly or man-womanly."

## Questions

- In today's world, what are some "locks" or "gates" that still restrict people's access to knowledge or expression?
- Woolf says that anger can distort art. Have you ever felt that strong emotions, like anger or frustration, affected how you expressed youreslf creatively or academically?
- Do you think the struggle WOolf describes&mdash;finding uninterrupted time to think or create&mdash;is stil relevant today? In what ways might it look different or similar? 

## Responses

- Pg. 67, about Jane Austen: "I could not find any signs that her circumstances affected her work in the slightest."
    - There are locks/gates/strong emotions that can affect us, but we don't have to let them affect us. It's more a societal opinion that that's what happens&mdash;but it doesn't have to. While there are things we can't control, we do have a lot of control over our lives. 
- Stewart: Anger can distort art, because it's hard to be patient when you're angry. If you're trying to be creative, anger hampers your ability to express yourself, because you're not patient enough to explore.
    - Margaret, in disagreement: Anything emotion isa drive to make art. It depends on what your purpose is ofc&mdash;like if you're trying to explore smth but then you get angry&mdash;but "distort" is the wrong word. Anger driving your art is not necessarily a bad thing.
- Someone said: "The disability minority is the only minority you could join at any second." 
    - Life can change like that. One point you have no locks/gates, the next moment you do.
- Ian: A lot of us came to this class feeling like we couldn't read. Isn't that a lock/gate? In the book, Woolf says, "The poor poet has not these days nor has had for two hundred years a dog's chant." If you don't have the opportunity to access stuff...maybe we will never know what opportuneless people had to express.
    - Shakespeare's daughter, what if she couldn't write? What if she had the same abilities as Shakespeare? Would she still have become *the* Shakespeare? 
- Pride is always a barrier for growth and expression. Woolf talks about the limitation of men's perspective on women; and that comes a lot from&mdash;in her eyes&mdash;their need to self-inflate in front of others. Which is pride. So to Woolf, men's understanding of women is distorted because of their pride.
- Some locks/gates are within ourselves. Like pride. Or fear. Not all locks/gates are external.
- Matt: Challenging the first question: At the business school, this student has found applying for jobs & internships extremely challenging; the lock/gate is knowing someone on the other side. 
- You miss 100% of the shots you don't take.
- To push back against the grain (as Ian says): When this student was on her mission, she had a companion who was awesome but always felt less than this student. One day, the student lost her patience: "Don't put yourself in a box," she told her.

Sage we need you here to inject a healthy hint of socialism into this "pull yourself up by your bootstraps" discussion.

- Courtney brought up censorship as a lock/gate ("since that seems to be relevant lately"). She drew on this idea of fear, saying she was so grateful to us all for unlocking the gate of fear whenever we host a discussion or raise our hand to comment.
    - pg. 109: "I should emplore you...I should remind you how much depends on you. And what an influence you can exhert upon the future." Each of us, Courtney said, really do have an influence.


# Discussion: Madi (not the one we sit by)

## Quotes

Two quotes from Ch. 6:

"Coleridge perhaps meant this when he said that a great mind is androgynous...Perhaps a mind that is purely masculine cannot create any more than a mind that is purely feminine, I thought" (pg. 97).

"Perhaps the androgynous mind is less apt to make these distinctions than the single-sexed mind... He meant perhaps that the androgynous mind is resonant and porous; that is transmits emotion without impediment; that is naturally creative, incandescent and undivided" (pg. 97).

## Questions

- What do you think Woolf means when she says that literature should be androgynous?
- What examples of great literature can you think of that are a good example of this?

## Responses

UGH Sage it is literally so tragic you aren't here I feel like you'd have so much to say.

- We can't put female authors in a box labelled, "female authors". We can't say, "They are a female author, therefore X."
- Matt: "Androgynous mind" means to be sensitive & respectful to all. Woolf is talking specifically ab male vs. female, but Matt says this applies to anything&mdash;race, etc.
- Be free from bias when you read things.
- Sarah(?): Androgynous means it can connect with different types of people.
- *Frankenstein* was a good example of "androgynous literature". It was just a really good book in its own right. This student said if she hadn't known Marey Shelley had written this, she wouldn't have assumed it was necessarily female or male.
- pg. 72: "But it is obvious that the values of man differ from the values which has been made by the other sex. Naturally that is so, he is the mask and voice which prevails." (Something like that.)
    - Society only acknowledges what men have to say in literature. 
    - We should honor and give recognition to women authors for the contributions they've made to 
    - Awww this poor guy seemed so stress to say that.
- Woolf is saying to stop this to-men-by-men-about-women writing.
- Ian: Woolf appears to think women are more capable of subtlety, while men are more direct; Ian says this is a more antiquated view, but whatever. 
    - *Frankenstein* is an example of something that is bigger than the book.
    <!-- - Ope he used "females" as a noun. -->

## Quote

"But how would all this be affect by the sex of a novelist, I wondered, looking at Jane Eyre and the others. Would the fact of her sex in any way interfere with the integrity of a woman novelist&mdash;that integrity which I take to be the backbone of a writer?" (pg. 72).

## Question

- What do you think Woolf means when she says, "integrity of the writer"?
- Do you think the writer's gender influences their work?
    - Why/why not?
    - Can you think of specific examples?

## Responses

- Everything we do, think, and say comes is influenced from our background, so of course gender . But, this student says, if she boils herself down to a woman, then she's put herself in a box. But once she thinks of her more than that, that's when she becomes more than just herself.
    - Wait that was deep.
- At Deseret Books they have a section called "Proper romances". They're clean and cute. "Proper". It's really interesting, this student noted, the perspective of the man in these stories. They're all the same: strong but sensitive. If a man were to write these proper romances, how would they portray the man? Maybe it'd be a little different.
    - A student drew off of that: On the flipside of that, in a lot of high fantasy, a lot of the women (especially love interests) fit the genre of super strong and intense woman.
        - e.g. Astrid in *How To Train Your Dragon*
        - If women wrote these stories, perhaps we'd see a lot more different types of emotion coming from these characters.


Madi's final remark: Keep an open mind and recognize there is a beauty and strength in all things.

- Courtney remarked about how many women use initials for their author name to hide their gender. They have to hide that they're a woman, otherwise that's a barrier preventing people from picking up their book.
    - Carl Jung: The animus & the something else.


# Activity: Musical discussion questions

(Like musical chairs, but instead of chairs, you're bouncing around different discussion questinos.)

ROLES

A. Discussion leaders.
B. Speakers.
C. Scribes. (Names & notes.)
D. Questioner. (Encourage deeper thinking & stuff.)
(E.) Quote seeker.

My group: Ian, Sarina, Stewart, Margaret, and me. 

## Class discussion afterwards

Courtney brought up these quotes:

"The whole of the mind must lie wide open if we are to get the sense that the writer is communicating his experience with complete fulness...freedom and peace."

"But I maintain that she would come if we work for her. And that so to work, even in poverty and obscurity, is so worthwhile."

## One more quote (that we didn't discuss)

pg. 71: "The wonder is that any book so composed holds together for more than a year or two, or can possibly mean to the English reader what it means to the Russian or the Chinese." What does this book mean to you today? 

# Class discussion: Favorite parts

- Pg. 67: "That perhaps was the chief miracle about it. Here a woman in 1800 writing...without fear, without bitterness, without preaching."
    - Even despitethe oppression women at this time went through, this woman was able to produce creative work. 
    - For these oppressed women: Writing for them was genuinely for themselves. Perhaps, then, it wasn't 
- Margaret: As Woolf reads these diff female authors, and thinks about how different women deal with being a woman.
    - Margaret brought up the show *Shogun*. Someone is talking to the main female lead. He's asking her, What's. **In life, men go to war for great causes&mdash;for honor, for thier country. But women are simply at war.**
    - Woolf speculates: Maybe Jane Austen didn't care, while this other girl did. 
    - **How we fight our battles defines who we are. But there's not a right way to do it.**
- AMONG US
- One student said he really liked the final paragraph.
- Letting experience live on: "For masterpieces are not single and solitary blurbs. They are...so that they experience...a high visceral voice" (p. 65). (I put ellipses bc I wasn't able to keep up).
    - Courtney brought up the idea of a **literary lineage**.
        - e.g. *Frankenstein* was the first sci-fi.
        - In epics and scripture, lineage is so important. It's a fascinating concept.
        - These stories spoken by the voices of yesterday continue through the voices of today.
- Sarah(?): A poor poet had no chance. A woman have even less chance of being successful. It's definitely true with the way society is shaped, which makes it even more incredible that there are women authors who have pushed past that.
    - Courtney brought up "Safo" (idk how to spell it), one of the first female poets we know ab.
        - On the other hand: Why do some voices still exist and not others? And who decides which should remain? **What makes a masterpiece of literature?**
            - In the time we've spent on Jane Austen, what other authors have we missed?