2025 09 09  
ENGL 202  
Courtney Buslsiewicz  
DAY TWO  

# Syllabus & Business & Stuff

Where the hell do we find the textbook? In the HBLL. You can only read it inside the library, bc it's on reserve.

Absences: You only get 2. 😱

Participation: She'll do cold-calling. 😱😱😱😱😱 If that makes you uncomfortable, you can tell her, and she'll tell you the day before what she's going to "cold" call you. 


# Renaissance

*What are some characteristics you might put to the Renaissance?*

- Discovery
- Art
- Deep thinking
- Trade
- Enlightenment
    - Not be confused with the Great Enlightenment period.
- Innovation
- Humanism&mdash;i.e. human empowerment
- Romanticized in Western thinking (e.g. "Golden Age"), but for other places its the start of colonialism & slavery.

## People

- Machiavelli
    - Saw great sorrow and war. And complicated issues (that have since been glossed over).
    - A friend (mercenary commander) wrote to him: "You must finish your history of this times, or future generations will never believe how bad it was, and they will never forgive us for losing and destroying so much so quickly" (paraphrased).
- Leo da Vinci
- Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni
- Raffaello Sanzio
- Galileo
- Petrarch
- Nicolaus Copernicus

## Characteristsics

- Varies depending on your focus.
    - e.g. politics, music, art history, etc.
- Regulated society.
    - Strict roles & class & gender ideals, stuff like that.
        - You'll oft see characters in Renaissance fiction pushing against those established norms.
- Apoalypse, era of desparation.
    - Lost of growth & trade, but also lots of wars and diseease.
    - Average life expectancy: 18 years.
- Born out of Middle Ages, pushing toward Modernity.
- Began asking: What counts as political capital, culture, civilization, humanity?
    - People were pushing against the regulation & norms of society.
    - All our men are dead from wars :(
        - We can't build an army, so what can help us stand out as a country/society?
- Widespread revolutionary change.
- Italy &rarr; Spain &rarr; France &rarr; England.
- New advances & ideas
    - Copernicus: Earth moves around the sun.
    - Galileo: Telescope to heavens.
    - Christopher Columbus: New World to Europe.
    - Humanist thinkers: More thought to self.
    - Protestant Reformation: More concern w/ princes & kings than w/ Heavenly King


### Well-lived life of Renaissance

- Code of behavior
    - Thinking less ab afterlife.
    - Human action not judged in terms of right/wrong or good/evil.
    - Present, concret validity & effectiveness.

"The Renaisance assumption is that there are things here on Earth that are highlly worh doing, and that by doing them, humanity proves its prviliged position ...and do God's intent." (or smth like that was written on the slides.)


### Art

Art's focus is on realism. As for subjects, it's about the individual and their relationship to God and the world around them.  

## Questions ab the Ren

- What made the Ren start?
- What did the authors' lives look like?
- How did the phenomenons of the Ren grow popular?
    - How do ideas grow
- What were the "regulations" of the "regulated society"?


## Where do you see Ren characteristics & stuff in the readings?

- One student said: Rene Descarte emphasized the conquering himself (humanism). 
    - Third maxim.
    - "Except my own thoughts, there is nothing in my power." &mdash; Ren through-and-through.








OK I kinda zoned out for like the rest of class. But somewhere in the discussion, someone talked ab how we expect people to act how we would expect ourselves to act, rather than letting them express their own views & temperament. Prof drew on that noting how she always took issue with the Golden Rule: "Do unto others as you would want done unto you"...but maybe that's not how they want done unto them!

Another student somewhere in the discussion noted how we should still look to God for wisdom&mdash;not just our own thoughts&mdash;but that it's still amazing how God empowers us to look for wisdom ourselves. (idk he said it better.)