2025 10 14  
ENGL 202  
Courtney  
FRANKENSTEIN: DAY ONE

I was on time to class today, but I had to drop some logs in the pond so I missed 

# Romanticism

## Music

- Chopin
- others.

## Vis art

- Henry Fuseli, "The Nightmare", 1781.
- Theodore Gericault, "The Raft of the Medusa".
    - Painters began using current events & atrocities to shed light on injustices in dramatic compositions.
        - Call to the past to understand the present.
- John Constable, "The Hay Wain", 1821.
    - Romantic painters turned their attention to nature and *plein air* painting, painting out doors.

They're enamored by the mysterious, and they want to know what draws you to the dark.

Movement into psychological states in art & literature.

## *Auguries of Innocence*, William Blake

- Truth is good but can be used for bad.
- "To be in a Passion you Good may Do \ But no Good if a Passion is in you."
- "God Appears & God is Light \ To those poor Souls who dwell in Night \ But does a Human Form Display \ To those who Dwell in Realms of day"
    - This idea of light is really important to people of the time. 
    - Prometheus's story (which ig Romantic artists were obsessed w/ or smth?) is all about light (fire).
- "The Childs Toys & the Old Mans Reasons \ Are the Fruits of the Two seasons \ The Questioner who sits so sly \ Shall never know how to Reply \ He who replies to words of Doubt \ Doth put the Light of Knowledge out."
    - Critique of reason & science. Questioning logic. (Very prominent in Romanticism.)

# Frankenstien

## Mary Shelley's *Introduction to Frankenstein*

- Shelly was 18 when she began writing *Frankenstein*. By the time she was finished writing it, she had lost two babies. And she had had a dream that one of those babies had come back to life. 
- Shelley started the story after being pressured by multiple people in her life ("Start writing! Just write something!")
- Downfall of the monster. Isolation & rejection are the two elements that causes the monster to go insane. The poor monster just wants something to relate.
    - Parallel for parenting?
        - In one of the film adaptations, when the monster is first born, it crawls like a baby. 
        - Studies show that when a newborn goes without touch, affection, attention and love, it has significant consequences.
- "I busied myself to write a story. One which rivaled those that inspired this task. One that would speak to the mysterious fears of our nature..." What are those "fears of our nature" that we hold that this book might take a look at?
    - Being unlovable. Being an "other".
    - Isolation.
    - Fear of knowledge.
        - Light of knowledge helped him to learn, but also became a burden of knowledge.
        - Ignorance is bliss.
    - How our actions can, intentionally or unintentionally, bring destruction.

## *How To Read Frankenstein*

Ways to read.

- Compares to French Revolution & Industrial Revolution. In a sense, those are monsters that we created.
- You can interpret that every character as a different part of Victor Frankenstein's personality.
    - Especially since we get the story from Victor.
        - Is he a reliable narrator?
- The monster's perspective is left out, we only get Victor's. 
- Self loathing.

## Kylee's Discussion Question

The moment the monster is created, Victor has a very sudden change of emotion.


BEFORE:

- "Having spent some months in successfully collecting and arranging my materials..."
- "A new species would bless me as its creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe their being to me."
- "My limbs now tremble... but then a resistless, and almost frantic impulse, urged me forward. I seemed to have lost all soul or sensation but for this one pursuit."

Sounds almost like a manic episode.

AFTER:

- How can i describe my emotions at this catastrophe... I had selected his features as beautiful... Now that I had finished, the beauty of the dream vanished, and **breathless horror and disgust filled my heart**. Unable to endure the aspect of the being I had created, I rsuhed out of the room..."

First instinct is to hide.

### Questions

- *To what extent can passion be dnagerous?*
- *Do we experience similar situations in our lives where we may get wrapped up in the idea of something, but the reality isn't what we expect?*
- *(Expectation vs. reality)*

### Responses

- One student noted that she and her husband are trying for kids. She noted how while she is super excited, she keeps having to limit herself to make sure she doesn't make expectations that may not be met.
- Impulsive. Was after the gratification of "I did something."
- Sage noted how Victor has a black & white, all or nothing perspective on the thing. He was all for it, and then very quickly dropped it entirely. 
    - Another student noted how, if she was going to make a creature, she'd start with something small like a rat, not an eight-foot tall beast. Victor really went all out.
- One student compared this to artists' flow state, where they go at it while they're creating, and how sometimes when an artist finishes they take a step back and realize what they made is junk.
- Not a healthy impulse. It wasn't good, it wasn't balanced. It wasn't moderated. 
    - This student compared it to fastly falling in love with someone that isn't the right person. Other people might be like, "Woah, slow down!" They might be seeing red flags that you won't acknowledge until your rose-tinted glasses finally come off.
        - Kylee noted this is very relatable in Provo culture lmao.
    - Shelley captures that feeling in a way that's really relatable. You can almost understand how Victor got to this level obsession.
    - Another student compared this to when Nephi called Laman and Lemuel "past teaching", pointing out how they had literally seen an angel and were still insistently sinful. 
    - #relatable
        - It's very easy for us as people to get a one-track mind where you're so obssessed with the idea of something that it's all you can think about. 
            - This student postulated that the second you lose control the thing you're obssessed over is when you do your heel-faced turn and backtrack on it.
- Ian noted he gets some *Wicked* vibes. When Elpheba is born, her parents are immediately disgusted by her green skin and reject her. When Victor's monster is born, he is disgusted by its eyes, and rejects it.
    - Victor doesn't see the monster as a human, he sees it as something else. He doesn't call it human, he calls it a "thing". 
    - *Wicked*'s a good example to show us, though, that rejected members of society have feelings to. Will *Frankenstien* do the same?
    - I wonder if, if the monster dies, there will be rejoice like there was in *Wicked*. ("No one morns the wicked!!!")

## Small group discussions

Questions

- How does Victor Frankenstein’s pursuit of knowledge reflect Enlightenment ideals, and how does Shelley begin to critique those ideals? What does Victor value more: discovery, glory, or human connection?
- In what ways does Shelley position Victor as a new Adam, a new Prometheus, or a new God, and how do these roles illuminate the dangers of redefining “creation”?

Responses

- Victor originally wanted glory. Every character in a novel is driven by their desires.
    - pg 28: glory over wealth.
    - Wants to be known.
    - Ego thing. His ego comes up in a lot of different places. 
        - He says he can't tell Henry about creating this creature because he doesn't want to make him upset...but in reality it's probs because he doesn't want to change his brother's perception of him.
        - Doesn't acquit his servant for his brother's murder because he doesn't to tell everyone about the monster and make everyone think he's a madman.
            - Running in circles to justify his actions.
- What if God is like Victor...He created man, which He loved, but then man fell, and He rejected them. (Hence why He feels absent since then.)
    - STORY IDEA!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! (Human) guy creates a new species or smth, but then the species "falls", so later he tries to cultivate a specific people within the species, but then they reject him to, and he keeps doing stuff like that over and over again. It's satirical and a comedy, and all the guy's interactions w/ the species parallel God's actions throughout the Old Testament.
- One student was like, "Victor got so obssessed with whether or not he could, that he never considered whether or not he should." This drew parallels between *Frankenstein* and *Jurassic Park*.
- Courtney noted: Analogies are analogies for a reason. Authors push them until they break. Victor is a parallel to God...but He is not God.
- Courtney brought up an excerpt: Page 50 (near end of chapter 4), Victor is coming to terms with his creation. He had gone out and come back in and everything. "By very slow degrees...I recovered. I remember the first time I became capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure...It was the divine Spring, and the season contributed greatly to my convalescence...my gloom disappeared, and in short time, I became as cheerful as I was before I was attacked by the fatal passion."
    - Nature vs. nurture. 
        - Nature in the literal sense&mdash;he was brought joy by observing nature.
        - But also in the metaphorical sense: Is the creature murderous by its nature, or is it because of how it's treated.
    - Is our control of passion born and given to us by God, or is it something we have to learn?