2025 09 16  
ENGL 202  
Courtney Bulsiewicz  

# The Tempest Summaries

* A wizard has a major crashout, decides to take it out on his enemies, hatches a plan to get back at his people and return to his former glory, makes people think their family has died, makes people fall in love, and ultimately succeeds, but ruins everyone’s week. 
Prospero and Miranda are on an island, and Prospero uses his magic to try to take revenge on the people who usurped him. Miranda falls in love with Ferdinand, and Prospero learns how to forgive. They eventually return home.  

* Prospero, a wizard, learns to forgive after being taken advantage of. 
A duke is sent away to an island where he takes over and creates a storm to shipwreck the people who betrayed him, so he could plot his revenge. Ultimately, his daughter and the betrayer’s son fall in love, the duke reveals himself to the people, and everyone makes amends. 

* What starts as a plot for revenge is healed through true love and forgiveness. 

* Nicole & Margaret: Prospero's power is usurped unjustly by his brother, and he and his daughter are banished to a far away island, where he enslaves a magical spirit and a native islander man. He brings his enemies to the island using a magical storm, and messes with them using the magic from the enslaved spirit. Eventually, he brings the shipwrecked crew to him, and forgives their injustices towards him, condoning a new life for his daughter and her new fiance.

* Man uses magic to get back at his enemies and then learns to forgive.
Sydney and Taylin: A purposeful storm brings old friends and enemies together on a mysterious yet magical island. Individuals grasp for power but one leader of the island finds a way for everyone to find a resolution: wanted or not. Love, power and justice star in this play of seeking humanism. 

* A wizard creates a storm to manipulate power, love, relationships and forced collaboration on a magical island. 

* Matt & Amy: Prospero causes Alonso & co. to shipwreck. Groups of people end up on the island and find Prospero. Miranda and Ferdinand fall in love. Caliban conspires to kill Prospero. Antonio and Sebastian plot to overthrow Alonso. 

* Prospero uses spirits and magic to regain his dukedom.

* Tori and Preston :An exiled duke uses magic to cause a shipwreck as a way to manipulate people who have wronged him. Due to his daughter’s nuptial’s he’s able to regain societal standing and forgives others as well as giving up his magic

* An exiled duke obtains his goals through manipulation of others with magic. 

* Walker and Savannah: Prospero, an exiled magician, exacts revenge on the people who wronged him by creating a storm. The storm causes a shipwreck that maroons those on the boat and they get split into 3 groups. Ferdinand finds Prospero and his daughter, and fall in love ending in marriage. Prospero manipulates his enemies but is then moved with compassion because of Ariel.

* The magician Prospero goes through a journey of revenge that ends in his renunciation of magic and a peaceful resolution due to his pity for those shipwrecked on the island as part of his revenge. 

* SSM: Prospero, the Duke of Milan, was ousted by his brother and stranded on an island. He uses magic to shipwreck and haunt those involved in his ousting, eventually bringing them to reconcile with their former actions. Alonso agrees to give Prospero back his dukedom in return for Prospero’s forgiveness.

* The ousted duke Prospero causes a tempest to bring his tormentors to justice and regains his dukedom.

* Prospero’s throne was taken by his enemies, so once they are at sea he causes their ship to wreck and spread them across the island. One group tries to kill him and the other 

* At the start of the reading this week Ferdinand and Miranda started falling in love. They were approved to be married by prospero. Meanwhile sebastian, antonio and gorgonzola get taught a lesson by Prospero. 

* Lovers unite, former injustice is fixed and Caliban's plot is ruined. 



* The duke of milan (Prospero) was banished with his daughter (Miranda) and causes a storm when he leaves because he feels he is wronged. The king’s son (Ferdinand) and Miranda fall in love after meeting each other. Antonio (the fake duke) convinces the King’s brother (Sebastian) to kill the king (Alonso). Prospero evades death, frees his servants, and reveals to the king and his party that he is alive and the rightful duke. 

* The rightful Duke of Milan (Prospero) creates havoc on the King (Alonso) and his party, resulting in him revealing himself as alive and being replaced as the Duke of Naples. 

* The magician, Prospero, brings his enemies to an island; where he manipulates them into giving him his dukedom back, and then gives up his magic.



* Prospero summons a tempest to get revenge on those who wronged him, but he forgives them at the end for their wrongdoings and reclaims his dukedom.









Natalie & Caleb: A duke 👑 experiences life 💖 through disagreements 😡 over land; his daughter 👩 marries the son 🧔‍♂️of his friend(?)🤷, people want to kill 🤺 him, a spirit 👻 is his backup friend 🤝, he eventually forgives 😇those people.


Brianna and Corynn 

Starts off with a storm that we find out later that Prospero causes. And Ferdinand is separated from Alonso and Sebastian and runs into Miranda and Prospero and falls in love and serves him and they get engaged. Prospero visits enemies and forgives them and renounces his magic and everyone is reunited and forgives each other . 


Prospero causes a storm with magic on enemies and causes chaos for them, then forgives them and renounces his magic gets his dukedom back 

## One word

*Shakespeare described his play in one word ("The Tempest"). What if we try that?*

Reconciliation
Storm
Dukin’
Rightful
Reconciliation
Redemption
Repair
Confusion 
Power 
Journey
Political
Dukedom
Seasick 
Journey
Forgiveness 
Justice
Revenge
Confusing
Rulership 
Hum
Unrevenge 
Chaotic
Ambition

*The most common words were "reconciliation" and "journey".*

# Tempest Discussion

Prospero's Character:

- Compassion for honest G.
- Sees love btwn daughter & F. &rarr; change
    - This was the **turning point** for his character.
- Pre-G: 
    - Descriptors
        - Vengeful
        - Cynical
        - Power hungry
        - Jealous
        - Close-minded
    - Actions (that evident those descriptors)
        - Schemes a lot (a LOT a lot).
        - Heavily relied on his magic.
        - Caused fear.
        - Targeted individuals. 
            - Torturing & sending spirits all over.
        - That said, one student pointed out, he told the spirit from the beginning that he'd free them.
            - But you can def tell that after the wedding, everything in the plot seems resolved...frankly in a pretty convenient way. (Everything works out p nice.)

## Musical Discussion

### Power/Justice/Manipuliation

- Power for ill
- Question: Did Prospero give up his magical power to be the rightful Duke, or did he give up his magical power now that he has political power as the Duke?
    - It's hard to give up power once you have it.
    - Last line of *The Tempest*: "Mercy itself frees all faults. As you from crimes pardoned be. Let your indulgence set me free." ("God frees from.")
        - Student who quoted this said that this reads as Prospero moving on.
        - "your" == audience.
            - Is *he* even free, as a character in a play, being observed?

### Rationality vs. Magic

- Insight: Vengence correlates to magic, forgiveness correlates to not magic. 
    - When he's vengeful in his life is when he's focused on his magic. But when he decides to forgive is when he decides to let go of his magic.
    - He only turns to magic when he loses his Dukedom. He turns to magic to fulfill that power vacuum.
        - Maybe that was his plan from the beginning&mdash;to use the magic as a tool to get back to where he was before?
            - Power as human need.
- Question: Relationship to church & magic/religion?

### Storm

- Insight: Dichotomy of control vs. chaos.
    - To Prospero: It's all controled.
    - To everyone else: Perceive it as pure chaos and terrible thing happening (that shouldn't be).
- Question: How have you seen this in y'all's lives?
    - When have you perceived something as chaos at first, but in hindsight it felt logical/"controlled"? 
- Teacher noted that Prospero, in giving up his magic (I think that's what she tied it to, maybe it was smth else idk), had to give up some of his control.

### idk what this topic was

- Insight: Wedding is turning point. Other turning point: Pg. 52, talking to Ferdinand: If I've punished you, your compensation makes ammends..."My trials of love." After that, it's uphill.

### Miranda

- Insight: 
    - Pondering "How do their perspectives differ" reminded student of *Tangled*: Rapunzel vs. Gothel. 
        - Gothel: Cynical, just wants power for herself.
        - Rapunzel (Miranda): Trusting, perhaps naive (doesn't know evil in world).
    - Noticed as Miranda is the only woman in *The Tempest*, she doesn't have her own character arc, & lacks depth. 
        - Hence, characteristics she embodies (hopefulness, innocence, going with the situation, wants the best for everyone) represents the ideal for a Renaissance woman.
            - Don't want a woman like Prospero.
- Question: Does Miranda reflect the ideal of a Renaissance woman, as a character that supports the men's character arcs & plotlines (as opposed to having her own)?
- Idealistic about getting married. Very trusting, doesn't see some of the things her dad does.

### How did reading a second time impact experience?

- Insight: 
    - Each of students in group were looking for smth specific when they read it (writing style, heroic characteristics, etc.). Reading a second time w/ the culture & background completely changed how they read it. 
        - When looking for different things, you find different things (in the same reading).
- Question:
    - How did reading *The Tempest* in the context of *this* class affect how you read it?
    - How would your perspective of *The Tempest* be different if you read the play with a different purpose/in a different context?
- Text:
    - Act 2, Scene 2, line 75 (pg 37): Changes one master for another.
        - Maybe if I get a second master, they can get rid of the master that has power over me currently. Were they intending to end up completely free, or just find a more preferable servitude?

### Misc stuff people found interesting

- "Let your indulgence set me free" was the last thing Shakespeare ever wrote by himself.
    - Lots of people see this as Shakespeare's farewell/"Swan song".
- "Hell is empty and all the devils are here."
    - Prof said a turning point for Prospero was Ariel. (Act 5, Scene 1, very beginning.)
        - "PROSPERO: Where are my man? ARIEL: They're bound together in the same fashion you gave charge. But chiefly, he that you turned, sir, Gonzalo his tears ran down his beard...if you now beheld them your affections would become tender."