2025 10 28  
ENGL 202  
Courtney B  

# Discussion: Amy

## Alfred Tennyson


- 1809-1892
- British poet
- *In Memoriam A.H.H*
    - Written after the death o fhis best friend.
        - Sage tells me people speculate they were gay.
    - His friend was 22 when he died.
    - Originally written as many short poems, but then compiled.

*That loss is common would not make*  
*My own less bitter, rather more:*  
*Too common! Never morning wore*  
*To evening, but some heart did break.*  

Just because loss is common doesn't make it any less painful.

*A hand that can be clasp'd no more \ Behold me, for I cannot sleep, \ And like a guilty thing I creep \ At earliest morning to the door. \ He is not here; but far away \ The noise of life begins again, \ And ghastly thro' the drizzling rain \ On the bald street breaks the blank day.*

*So find I every pleasant spot \ In which we two were want to meet, \ The field, the chamber, and the street, \ For all is dark where thou art not.*

*I hold it true, whate'er befall; \ I feel it, when I sorrow most; \ 'Tis better to have loved and lost \ Than never to have loved at all.*


## Walt Whitman

- Written as an elegy to Pres. Abe Lincoln.

*When lilacs last in the dooryard bloom'd, \ And the great star early droop'd in the western sky in the night, \ I mourn'd, and yet shall mourn with ever-returning spring.*

*Prais'd be the fathomless universe, \ For life and joy, and for objects and knowledge curious, \ And for love, sweet love---but praise! priase! praise! \ For the sure-enwinding arms of cool-enfolding death.*

*I saw battle-corpses, myriads of them, \ And the white skeletons of young men, I saw them, \ I saw the debris and ddebris of all the slain soldiers of the war, \ But I saw they were not as was thought, \ They themselves were fully at rest, they suffer'd not, \ The living remain'd and suffer'd, the mother suffer'd, \ And the wife and the child and the musing comrade suffer'd, \ And the armies that remain'd suffer'd.*

## Questions

1. How do the speakers in the poems respond to death, grief, and loss?
2. How are these responses similar or different to those in the texts we've read?
3. What can this comparison teach us about the broader movements of the time? (Realism, transcendentalism, etc.)

# Discussion: Julianna

Grief can server as a reminder that love existed in the first place. We need to experience all emotions to have a fullness of joy. 

Whitman: 

- "Come lovely and soothign death."
- "And I knew death, its thought, and teh sacred knowledge of death."


## Questions

1. How are Tennyson's and Whitman's journeys through grief similar and/or different?
2. Do Whitman and Tennyson portray mourning as something universal or deeply personal?
3. Who do you think would be more receptive to the Plan of Salvation?

# Realism

"One of the most powerfully influential global artistic movements in the nineteenth century" - *Norton*

eg.s:

- Crime & Punishment
- Huckleberry Finn
- War and Peace
- Middlemarch (Courtney highly recommends.)
- The Portrait of a Lady

"The romantic poets had sought to liberate literature from the grip of traditional courtly manners and traditions to focus instead on nature as a model of freedom and beauty...Realist writers, by and large, lost faith in this ideal: nature no longer seemed to provide a plausible alternative. Now all that was left of reality was what you could see with your naked eyes: gritty, ugly industries; the power of money; starving, broken workesr; social hierarchies; dirt, decay, and disease." *Norton* pg. 577.


## Cultural Shift from ideal to actual (embodied experience)

- Scientific and empirical thinking.
    - Material observation.
    - Darwin, geology, and physiology shifted public imagination from divine explanation to material observation.
    - The world was flesh and process, not fixed ideal.
- Industrialization and urbanization.
    - Human beings became visible as;dj flasud pasuidawfh paoshfpfhaspf
- Photography and journalism.
- Secularization.
    - You can see that w/ nature, too. Instead of nature being this metaphyiscal concept, you are embodied within nature, and it affects you physically. In the next (short) story we read, the yellow wallpaper factors into her psychology.


## Questions realist writers were concerned with

- What is possible to know?
- What *is* reality?
- Can we rely on our senses? Or do we need to turn to facts and statistics, theories, etc.?
- Can we see reality from a single, individuual perspective? Or do we need to take a bird's-eye view?

## J.M.W. Turner painting: Snow Storm: Steam-Boat off a Harbour's Mouth

If you were a romantic poet, how would you describe the storm?

- Chaotic.
    - Emotionally intense; abstract.
- Might describe the sensations you feel & colors you see and stuff.
- Obscure.
- Distressed. Despair.
- Turmoil.
- Fear.
- Distrubed.

If you were a realist writer, how would you describe the storm? How would that description differ? What would you notice or emphasize?

- Incomprehensible.
    - Inability of language (or in this case, a painting) to capture something so immense. (In the case of the poets, something so immense as grief.)
- It's a storm. :)
- Cold.
    - Sensory stuff.
- Embodied senses: Biting cold. Nips at the sailors on the deck.
- Calmness in the storm. 

Realist descriptions talk about purely what they see. e.g., "the storm ahs lots of dark colors", while romanticism is like, "the storm makes me feel despair."

When you get down to it, these movements are very arbitrary. Historians might label them differently than artists. And they're not black and white; there's def some overlap.

Realist thought: Words are really faulty. They only are able to outline the human experience, not completely describe it...

To me, it seems like realists are thinking that to describe the human experience is a task too large and impossible for any single person to undertake. 

One of the (Realist) poems, a student noted how, despite how the author doesn't use any emotion words, you can still feel the emotion the speaker's feeling.

## Writing assignment (due tn)

1. Go out into the world or sit here in your desk ​
2. Choose one small, ordinary detail around you right now (someone turning a page, a light flickering, leaves falling, the feel of your chair or wet soil, the dust motes in the air, etc.)​
3. Write 6–8 lines describing that object, detail, experience, moment as precisely and realistically as possible.​
4. Avoid emotion words; let observation carry the meaning. And ground your writing in the senses.​
5. Submit your writing to the "Realism Participation" assignment in Learning Suite.​