2025 09 23  
ENGL 202  
Courtney Bulsiewicz  
DAY...five?

# Discussion Leader Assignment/Sign-up

See details on LS > Schedule. There's some guidance for what kind of question she wants, as well as examples.

# Paradise Lost

## Context

Renaissance lead to Reformation period *and* Enlightenment period.

- Reformation:
    - Religious debates and reform on authority
    - faith
    - salvation challenged Church
    - established Protestantism.
- Enlightenment:
    - Reason as highest authority
    - individualism
    - scientific method (universal laws)
    - deism

## Class work w/ partners

1. Go to the Intro, Pascal, Kant readings
2. Identify lines you underlined or annotated as key ideas they put forward that will help us understand their outlook on humanity, God, reason, (wo)man, intellect, etc.
3. Identify lines that are confusing or contradictory we might seek to understand more.
4. Share w/ class

Pascal was a Catholic, while Milton was a Protestant. So they were on opposite sides of the reformation. Meanwhile, Kant is a fr fr enlightenment guy. 


### Discussion

#### Kant

- Kant: "It is difficult for any single individual to extricate himself from the minority that has become second nature to him."
    - It's important for us to decide for ourselves what is right and wrong.
    - Prof said Kant suggests it will take time: "It is now asked whether we at present live in an enlightened age. The answer is no, but we do live in an age of enlightenment." It will take time for us to get used to Enlightenment reasoning.
- Kant: "minor" and "minority". Kant used "minority" to refer to the intellectual infancy contained within "minor". Was this normal for the time, was he coming up with his own definition for the word, was it just a play on words?
    - Stewart noted how we use the word "minor" to refer to someone who is dependent, which mirrors Kant's usage of the word "minor" to mean dependent on other's thought.
- Kant: "It is so comfortable to be a minor."
    - Human nature: We tend to do what's comfortable and normal. 
    - Once we break out of that, we have to take on that responsibility.
    - Student said it's a matter of personal responsibility: It's easy, when you base your thoughts on another, to blame them when things don't go your way.
    - Kant: smth ab the mind must lose its freedom or smth. 

#### Pascal

- Pascal: "For in fact what is man in nature? A Nothing in comparison with the Infinite, an All in comparison with the Nothing, a mean between nothing and everything. Since he is infinitely removed from comprehending the extremes, the end of things and their beginning are hopelessly hidden from him in an impenetrable secret, he is equally incapable of seeing the Nothing from which he was made, and the Infinite in which he is swallowed up." 
    - We so often avoid the extremes of living bc it's uncomfortable for us bc we can't comprehend the extremes.
    - Both extremes are incredible, both zooming out and zooming in.
        - We are unable to comprehend *both* extremes.
    - Prof noted how Pascal works a lot w/ dichotomies. There's such nuanced ideas you can glean from looking at two disparate ideas next to each other...but it can also feel a bit like a riddle.
- Pascal: "And in speaking of minds, they consider them as in a place, and attribute to them movement from one place to another; and these are qualities which belong only to bodies."
    - Another dichotomy: He's saying philosophers will misattribute things to try to rationalize them. 
        - Philosophers try to understand things that can't be understood.
    - Pascal is arguing we reason about the infinite bc it scares us. But we must make peace with it.
        - Reason is not the answer.
            - "Let us therefore not look for certainty and stability. Our reason is always deceived by fickle shadows; nothing can fix the finite between the two Infinites, which both enclose and fly from it."
            - "Instead of receiving the ideas of these things in their purity, we colour them with our own qualities"
            - Hence, Pascal and Kant are on the opposite side of the spectrum. Kant says reason can bring growth. Pascal says we should leave it to God.

#### Introduction to Milton's *Paradise Lost*

- Sonnet: "God doth not need either man's works or his own gifts. Who best bares his mild yolk, he serves him best." We become our best selves when we serve God.
- Milton's God and his perspective on God, and his POV on innocence: "Adam and Eve gain knowledge of their happiness when they lose it."
    - Some scholars say they could never have the happiness they had in paradise again because they had fallen. 
    - Meanwhile, when we talk about it in LDS, we talk ab how the fall allowed us to eventually reach greater joy.
- Prof noted how interesting it is to read this story at a religiously backed institution. 
    - Prof noted how there's some connections we all could make. There's tension right now about religiosity; the idea of religiosity vs. spirtuality; what is our relationship w/ God? Where does religion have place in politics? 
        - Prof invites us to do as we did w/ Shakespeare while we read Milton: What connections do we have w/ the characters, the story, Milton as a writer, etc.
- p. 27: "The moral questions of Paradise Lost cannot be reduced to merely political ones...[but politics] was the cause to which Milton devoted himself...intense responsibility and pressure that is necessary for a poet to be great."
    - Knowing the context this story was born out of (political context and religious origin story Milton wanted to look at), what are the questions Milton is asking?

## Protestant Reformation

- Humanists of Renaissance period were started to trust the church less. Wanted reform &rarr; less rigidity and corruption.
- Martin Luther (German monk and theologian)
    - Only grace through faith, not rewards and punishments.
    - Put forward idea that God's word is enough&mdash;scripture alone can save us, we don't need a spiritual leader to interpret His word.
- Religion and national identity inteertwined. Nations picked sides: Catholic vs. Protestants.
    - Pascal: Catholic: Stressed predestination, grace, human weakness. dDeeply skeptical of human reason alone.
    - Milton: Englash Puritan, Protestant: Believed in individual freedom, opposed monarchy and Catholic hierarchy. Paradise Lost dramatizes biblical themes but w/ a humanist/Puritan fusion&mdash;celebrates liberty, reason, and the responsibility of choice.
- On the arts and culture: Vernacular languages (so laypeople can read the Bible). Polemical tracts, sermons, and poems emerge. Think Luther's hymns...*Paradise Lost*.
    - *Paradise Lost* breaks from what was common at the time. Knowledge is spreading, we're moving towards the Enlightenment, where people want to think on their own. 
- Eventually, Catholic Church denounced Prots as hereises &rarr; Retrenchment & policing.
- Invigorated thought and letters across Christendom.


## Enlightenment characteristics

We discussed characteristics that, based on what we read, identify the Enlightenmnet.

- Reason
- Freedom
- Individual rights
- Universal laws
- Scientific thinking
- "I" vs. society
- Deism: God as a rational creature, not intervening.
- Challenging structures such as the Creat Chain of Being:
    - Great Chain of Being: God > angels > humans > animals > plants > minerals, social orders.
- Rises of places of debate: Coffeehouses, salons, joujrnals, encyclopedias, etc.
- Knowledge became more widely available. Literacy increased, encyclopdieas created. Helped push social order.
- BUT: Social hierarchies still persisted for women, minorities, colonized peoples, etc.


## Why did the chicken cross the road?

Courtney said she likes to pitch philosophies against each other by pretending what reasoning someone would give for a chicken to cross a road.

Courtney gave examples:

- The chicken crossed the road because I willed it so. -- Prospero
- To see more people and how wonderful the new side is! -- Miranda
- To die. In the rain. -- Hemingway.
- For fun. -- Epicurus
- To live deliberately...and to suck all the marrow out of life. -- Thoreau
- It was the logical next step after coming down from the trees. -- Darwin
- For the greater good. --Plato

<br>

Then we came up w/ our own. Here's what me and my partner came up with:

- Kant:
    - Depends on whether they're enlightened or not:
        - They're crossing the side to enlightenment.
        - The chicken was told to by its farmer, and it doesn't think for itself, so it walked across despite the inherent danger of the cars wizzing by.
- Pascal:
    - The chicken couldn't stand to not understand what was on the other side...even though there are an infinite number of roads to cross.
    - Trying to comprehend the infinite. (He never will.)
- Milton:
    - Because God gave the chicken freewill.

<br>

### In conversation

Ren: "Look at the glory and potential of humankind&mdash;let's learn from the ancients."  

Reformation&mdash;Catholic: "But humans are fallen [wretched]. Reason is weak. Only God's grace can save."  
Reformation&mdash;Protestant: "Humans are fallen, yes, but God has given us reason and liberty. With grace, we can freely choose obedience."  

Enlightenment: "Reason is our highest guide. True religion is moral, rational, and free from dogma. We don't need priests to think for us&mdash;we must think for ourselves."

## Women

Women challenged & expanded upon the ideas of their time. Mainstream enlightenement, while prioritizing reason, liberty, and progress, often excluded women.Equiano and Wollstonecraft used Enlightenment ideals to critique the hypocrisy of the era, pushing for a more radical and inclusive vision of human rights.

"[Women] have neither the strength of brutes nor the eye of reason to fix their problems" (paraphrased). Uses the new style of reasoning that men of the majority imployed to say, "By that reasoning, you're incorrect about women. Go poop your pants fool."

## Milton

Skipped this slide. Look for it on the content tab in LS, if you're interested.

## *Paradise Lost*

- Draws from classical tradition and Puritan Christianity
- Breaking form, not using iemic pentameter (???), so that he could reach all people, not just the educated.
- Reaching for the cosmos, not just the world of battle.
- Talking about something that's real.
- Yet still asks some of the same questions epics of past did.


### How to read it?

- Use active reading. Surrender your attention and imagination.
- Poets care about sound. Read aloud.
- Focus on context & themes: free will, divine justice, the nature of good and evil, and the concept of redemption.
- Remember you know this story. (Roughly.)
- Remember your motivation.
- Summarize sections.
- Focus on key characters and how they change.
- Read it like a poem.
- Be forgiving and patient.
- Take note of form. Where do the stanzas break?

You'll find a way to read this that is meaningful to you. Stopping at the end of each stanza to memorize it may work for you, it may not. Maybe you look at every single footnote, maybe you don't. If you just want to experience Milton and this poem, maybe you'll think more broadly. 

It's a big poem. Good luck! Courtney doesn't recommend reading it in bed. She recommends being invested fs fs.

On the schedule, for each reading, you'll see listed what lines we'll focus on in class. So pay extra attention to those.


### Tips to reading

Courtney read the first stanza of *Paradise Lost* w/ us to show how to consume such a heavy text.

- Ask: Who is speaking?
    - Changes throughout the text.
    - In the beginning: Milton.
- Ask: Who are they speaking to?
    - In the first stanza: Milton is speaking to a higher power.
        - "O heavenly muse"
        - Common for poets authoring epics.
- Fall back on what is familiar.
    - e.g. "instruct me"
    - e.g. capitalizing "He" or "that Man" probably means they're taling ab Christ or God.
    - mount of Sinai: perhaps they're talking about Moses, as a "type of Christ."
- Note of allusions. There's tons of those. Poets love those.
    - That can be overwhelming bc you're like, "I need to know everything they're talking ab!" But you don't to understand it. (If you do, it's a treat, but it's not necessary.)


Courtney referenced a part of *The Illiad* where a goddess assures Achilles that he doesn't need his armor to win in battle, telling us we are enough as we are to tackle this text.