2025 10 23  
ENGL 202  
Courtney B.  
Last day of *Frankenstein*

# Student-led Discussion: Stuart 

Stuart juxtaposed two scenes.

"Our lives... will be harmless and free from the misery I now feel. Oh! My creator. Make me happy; Let me feel gratitude towards you for one benefit! Let me see that I excite the sympathy of some existing thing; do not deny me my request!" - The Monster (Ch. 17)

"I saw by the light of the moon the daemon at the [window]...As I looked on him, his countenance expressed the utmost extent of malice and treachery." -- Victor Frankenstein (Ch. 20). For context: This is when the monster is looking at the female companion, now almost completely made.

Then he asked:

**These scenes portray a juxtoposition in the disposition of the monster. Is there one that is accurate? Why or why not?**

**How might Mary Shelley be epxloring the human experience?**

- Amy said: The monster identifies as both Adam and Satan from *Paradise Lost*. When the monster wants something, he plays the role of Adam. As soon as he doesn't get something he wants, he flips into Satan.
    - Is this an intentional role he's taking? Or are those the only two roles he understands?
    - Stuart challenged
- Madi said that class 
- One student said that the monster learned pretty fast how to be malicious. Sage argued that he learned that pretty fast bc that's the behavior that was modeled to him by other humans.
    - Sage argues it's a learned behavior.
- Stuart noted that Frankenstein trusts the monster when he hears its voice. But every time he looks at the monster, he loses his trust.
- Ian noted that perception plays a big role here. Both of these quotes are perceiving each other.
- Ian also noted that in the latter quote, Victor was not in the best headspace.

Stuart said: We can mean something but feal something different. Especially when we're in complicated situations that inspire a lot of feeling. There's a notion that logic and emotion are separated from each other.

# *Frankenstein*

## Discussion 1

Shelley's intro said when beginning to write the story she said she "busied [herself] to think of a story,&mdash;a story to rival those which had excited us to this task. One which would speak to the mysterious fears of our nature." Having finished the story, **what fears do you think Shelly was writing to?**

- Creation beyond control.
    - Is it good for us to make life?
- Societal challenges.
- Vulnerability.
- Fear of being rejected or unloved.
    - The mosnter felt like he didn't belong&mdash;and that he couldn't belong.
- Abandonment.
- Pursuit of knowledge.
    - This was during the industrial revolution, wasn't it?

## Discussion 2

"Critics believed the novel was hostile to religion, as it depicted a human being attempting to appropriate the role of God." Do you see *Frankenstein* as hostile in this way?

## Discussion 3: Authoral Implication

Intro: "What kind of person would write such a terrible story?"

Do you believe that this book reveals darkness in Shelley? If we argued last time that the creature was born with some Frank in him, does that mean this creation of Shelley's holds a clue towards her morality? What do we make of writers (Shakespeare, Milton, Shelley) creating despicable characters?

Last class (which I missed) we discussed how the monster had some of Victor in him...in that same vein, do Victor & the monster have some of Mary Shelley in them? Does Satan in *Paradise Lost* have some Milton in him?

- None of us are 100% pure.
    - "Hearts are rarely pure. But they are rarely impure either."
    - Noted that Shelley's thoughts might include more darkness due to experiencing social rejection.
- Writing is not just about who we are, but who we are experiencing. It's a way we can process it: We can separate ourselves from it and feel it out without drowning in what we're experiencing.
- One student noted: Writers have to go through many revisions and drafts writing their characters. Perhaps they aren't despicable at the start, but, this student argued, surely they are tainted by the end.

Did the story end in hope? Or despair?

- Stuart argued it ended in peace. I missed what his thoughts were tho (tragic).
- Madi said for her it ended in darkness. Both Victor and the monster send each other to misery.
- One student referred to the introduction that noted on how there was an absence of women in the story. She argued one of the points of the novel was that, without both sides of the coin in society (male & female).......ngl I kinda lost it.

## Discussion 4

We read poems by Rosssetti and Wheatley. (Or we were supposed to, anyway.)

**How do you see Shelley's novel and Rossetti's and Wheatley's poems in conversation with each other?**

- What differentiates a virtuous revenge to one that is malicious?
- Ian has a wild idea: In Rossetti's *The Goblin Makret* we have Laura and Lizzy...and Lizzy is short for ELIZABETH...maybe *The Goblin Market* is a *Frankenstein* fanfic about what if Elizabeth had prevailed and won Victor over instead of his impulses?????


# Romanticism &mdash; Realism

Next time we will be reading Realism text.

REALISM: 

- The ordinary, accurate (life-as-is) without romanticization
- Realistic/plausible
- Complex characters
- Social commentary
- Vernacular
- Objective narrator

As with any time we transition from one period to the next, always consider **how is one period a response to the previous?**

# Poems

We read to poems. One by Wheatley, one by Rossetti. (Or at least we were supposed to lol.)

## Pellis Wheatley

- West Africa &mdash; Boston
    - Kidnapped and sold into slavery at age 7/8.
    - They taught her how to read and encouraged her to pursue poetry.
- Considered first African American author of a published book of poetry.
    - Quite the battle, leading to publication in London.
        - Could not get it published in US.
        - Even after being published, there was tons of pushback like, "Nah, no way a black women wrote this!!!!"
    - Famous detractor: Thomas Jefferson.
    - 18 leading Boston men attested to her as a poet.
- Emancipated shortly after publication of her book of poems.
    - Ofc, that was not the end. There was no societal situation for a free slave to succeed. 
    - She did end up marrying, but died in poverty.

### *A Hymn to the Evening*

[A Hymn to the Evening by Phillis Wheatley.](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/143633/a-hymn-to-the-evening)

Pushing back on her naysayers, what is beautiful and powerful in Wheatley's poem? (Courtney said she didn't want to get too technical ab it, she just wanted to take some time to appreciate it.)

- One student noted that when she thinks ab nature she doesn't think ab humans. She also noted how part of this beauty is us praising God.
    - Courtney added onto that: The glow we get when we appreciate nature is similar (or perhaps the same) to the glow God can give us "in our bosom".
- One student noted the gratitude nature can help you feel. She noted how Wheatley is able to find gratitude in the beeatuy in nature, despite having such a hard life; she said that is indicative of her (good) character.
    - "Let placid slumbers sooth each weary mind." There's a recognition there that minds get weary.    
        - Perhaps it's Wheatley herself who is weary? But Courtney emphasized it's important&mdash;especially in poetry&mdash;to not conflate speaker with poet.

## Christina Rossetti

- Father, Gabrielle Rossetti, was a poet and political exile.
- Mother, Frances Polidor, sister to Lord Bryon's dear friend and physician.
- alsifj paoseiu fpoasdjf aspdf 

### *The Goblin Market*

Here's some ways *The Goblin Market* has been interpreted:

- Exploration of innocence to experience?
- Critique on Victorian gender roles?
- Commentary on fallen women?
    - Speaks to the introduction we read on Shelley.
- Christian allegory?
- Warning of unchecked yearning?
    - Just like in *Frankenstein*.
- Something else?

Here's what was said during our discussion:

- Christian allegory: 
    - If mortality is the temptation of the goblin and their fruit, Lizzy went through unharmed nad untainted by the fruit by keeping her life completely closed.
    - One of the characters (I can't remember if it was Laura or Lizzy) is oft interpreted as an allegory for Christ's suffering. Courtney referenced a passage from the poem (which she teared up while reading it and asked another student to take over): "She cried, 'Laura,' up the garden, 'Did you miss me? Come and kiss me. Never mind my bruises. Hug me, kiss me, suck my juices Squeez'd from goblin fruits for you, Goblin pulp and goblin dew. Eat me, drink me, love me; Laura, make much of me; For your sake I have braved the glen And had to do with goblin merchant men."
    - One student talked ab how her sisters always told her, "It's a lot easier to not gain weight than it is to lose it." Though it's harder to (metaphorically speaking) shut our eyes and ears and mouths, that's arguably the easier way to live.
- OK so ig I kinda checked out lmao.
- Gender:
    - Courtney brought up this passage: "Early in the morning..." to "...Talk'd as modest maidens should." They're self sufficient, but also upholding ideal roles as maidens.

Skibidi rizz ohio sigma gyatt labubu no phoenem ts peak fax.

# EXAM 1

AHHUHUHHHHAHAHHGHGHGHGHGHGHHHHHAHDHHFPD ipadsui fpasido fpasfh oasj lweji ia;lsdkjf pasioduf poiasd jf;zkdlj lkanljakfh ipaosduf apsdfk jpawejrpioaewru pwae jspdo asldjkfn jlks bnljkasb la;shg puseoiu proiquwer pqweirp uqoiwefau;sdlfk hasbzkdbf kjasdakhf alsefh pawioerupwoirjql kwjhrlkajweg flkausjhf ;aisgj;alsjg lkafgasdfkjhasdfk gkwyeroiwyeroqwuieryoauisdgfkfavfsdbnvmzxnvgfhjzsgfkasdfgaoiwueyawerofugajgsdzhjgdfsdzjlfsdaoguiysdyogywaeiotouewourgqwrhqwejvfasdjfhjasdfjagfasdfuszdifsdajfhawgaewyfuiaewfsdfjahsdbfnaefmasdfhaseyfuiaodfkajsdfbsadvghasejaieurysdfujtrgyeudifjhrendjfguvfidjrhebnsjdjfiodkjrheydtsyueirueywyrutifduygwcsfdgfhguitrkejhbvrtghuivocxijnm


## Section 1

Don't be concerned about dates. Be concerned about the ideas of how is humanity changing, and how are the ideas important to human civilization changing?

## Section 2

Provide a quote from each of the major readings. Or you may choose to replace one of the major readings' quotes with a quote from one of the minor readings.

## Section 3

"The point of reflection is to make sure that the things you're pursuing continue to matter to you even as life changes around you. It will help you focus on why rather than the what."

Two prompts are given. 

The first prompt is guided, in case having too open a window is overwhelming for you.

The second prompt is very wide, allowing you to write about whatever it is that's in your heart.

## LIST OF THEMES

Let's play scategories. ANY themes or ideas that have come up from the beginning of class.

- Power.
- Relationships
    - Belonging.
    - Isolation & intimacy.
- Diety.
    - Belief of higher being.
    - Role of higher being.
- Accountability.
    - Personal accountablity.
- Fall from grace.
- Temptation.
- Gender ideals.
- What is morality? How is it defined?
- Revenge. HUGE theme.
- Destiny or fate.
- Knowledge & ambition.
- Good & evil.
- Exploration. Discovery.
- Monsters.
- Sexuality.
- Nature.
- Religion & magic.
- Fulfillment.
    - Personal fulfillment.
    - Societal fulfillment.
- Societal expectations.
- Societal failings.
- Family.
- Role of family.
- Familial expectations.
- Agency.
- Colonialism. Imperialism.
- Classism.
- Slavery.
- Time.
- Pride.