2025 10 16  
ENGL 202  
Courtney  


# Student-led Discussion

Discussion question: The characters in *Frankenstein* are shaped by the books they read. What books have you read that have shaped you?

- One student said she just read *Count of Monte Christo* and it was life changing.
- One student (girl w a deep voice who said *Practical Magic* was her favorite movie the first day of class) said it was Trevor Noah's memoir about growing up in South Africa post-aphartheid. (In high school, she took a trip to South Africa. So ig she read this to prepare? idk.) In it, Trevor said that he wasn't born in a place of great education. Consequently, he never learned much about WWII. He didn't really know who Adolf Hitler was. Nobody around him really knew who Hitler was&mdash;parents named their children Hitler because all they knew was that he was some famous guy. This made the student aware of how much they don't know and how many other people's experiences they are unaware of.
- One student said *Les Mis*.

I thought about it, and here's what I said for mine:

- *The Things They Carried* by Tim O'Brien.
- *1984* by George Orwell.
- *Maus* by Art Spiegelman.

# *Frankenstein* discussion/debate

DEBATE QUESTION: **Should there be a female creature made?**

Reasons for YES.

- Enlarge the family. The monster no longer has just a father but a larger family.
- The creature himself says, "I am viscious because I'm miserable." If you give him someone to love & someone who loves him, his malicious nature will probably fade. 
- Victor should do it so he doesn't die lol.
- To have someone to make the creature feel he is not alone.
- It is Victor's responsibility, as his creator, to do so. As his creator, is he not obligated to support his creation?

Reasons for NO.

- The need could be solved other ways, e.g. Victor takes in the monster himself.
- They'll procreate and cause problems for everyone.
- Even if a female is created, there's no guarantee she'd love him.
- There is darkness that love cannot touch. The creature is in pretty heavy darkness rn.
- Someone brought up *Passengers* with Jennifer Lawrence and Chris Pratt: Chris Pratt's character was awoken on a spaceship when he was supposed to be asleep. Miserable, he woke up another person to accompany him. Similarly, would a female creature be like, "Bro, you brought me into your life...when you knew it was miserable???" 
- If the creature himself is grossed out by his appearance (when he looks in the water), wouldn't the female also? And wouldn't she have the same reaction to herself?
- How would the companion turn out? What if they turn out to not have any desire for companionship but is just vengeful? Victor would be putting himself in a place lacking control for a second time.
- How do you know the creature will make good on its promise to not bother humanity? Impulsiveness was what got Victor into this mess in the first place.
    - The creature said he'd go to South America...but there are people in South America???
        - At this point I noticed people's reactions. They were like, "Yeah! Those poor people [in South America]."
- What makes us determine something as ugly? Sage argues it's just unfamiliarity.
    - Beauty is in the eye of the beholder. If everyone on Earth looked like the monster, we wouldn't think that look is ugly.
- Christopher Robbin seeing Winnie the Pooh holding onto a balloon as it rises: "What if you fall?" Pooh's response: "What if I fly?"

OTHER??

## Small-group discussions

- **If Victor is making the body...can he just make the female w/o a uterus??? Or just give the creature a vasectomy?????**
- Can you guarantee the creature will be good? No. But it is better to do something than nothing.
    - The creature has found peace before. It is only after being shown hatred that he became malicious.
    - The creatures said that if he found someone who was kind to him, he would praise them forever. 
- The act of making a companion to him is benevolent. Even if the companion is a little wack, he as a cool dude. 
- What is the alternative? Kill the creature, or let the create kill him?
- The reason the creature acts like a monster is because Victor abandoned him. If he waas chill with the female, she would not turn out like him, would she?
- **Creature is capable of pro-social behavior.**
    - e.g. when he cuts the wood for his protectors.
- Is the creature even responsible for his actions? We don't say children are responsible for their actions until age 8.
- Opening the door to collaboration gives Victor more control of the situation.
- Is it even a wife he wants, or just a companion? A companion is a lot less of a risk.
    - The only reason he asks for a female is bc Adam was given Eve. (Well, that and the Arabian girl who brings ) But regardless, he doesn't appear to want a female for sexual or romantic companionship.
- The creature has tried and tried again to find companionship with humans, but it hasn't happened. **It is unlikely he will ever find companionship from them.**
    - Elizabeth is a good example: You can show unceasing love to other people, even ones you don't understand...but trying to do that for a non-human creature...can a human do that?
    - The creature has already killed humans. How could he integrate into human society after commiting its most vile act? 
- He's a vegetarian!!!!!! He's such a chill guy!!!!!
- "Where is my mom? Where is my dad?" 😢
- Halo effect: The difference in how we treat those who look pretty and those who don't.

MAIN POINTS:

- Victor's control over anatomy.
- 'Tis better to act than to do nothing.
- Show the goodness of his character.