2025 10 09  
ENGL 202  
Courtney B  


# Paradise Lost

## Student Review

What students liked:

- Familiar. But still new.

What students disliked:

- It's poetry.
- Hard to understand all the allusions.

## Themes

- Ignorance &rarr; knowledge.
- Ignorance &rarr; experience.
- Fall & atonement.
- Accountability.
- Feminism.
- Gender ideas.
- Power.
- Freedom, Liberty.
    - Freewill/choice.
- Colonialism, Imperialism.
- Reason.
- Curiosity. 
- Morality.
- Mercy, hope, and justice.

## Characters Discussion

### The Son

Courtney's proposed questions:

1. *In Paradise Lost, how does Milton’s portrayal of the Son shape his vision of civilization itself? In what ways does the Son’s balance of justice and mercy, power and humility, reflect the moral or social order Milton imagines as necessary for restoring—or sustaining—human civilization after the Fall?*
2. *How does Milton develop the character of the Son throughout Paradise Lost? What changes—or deepens—in our understanding of Him from His volunteering in Book III to His judgment and mercy in Book X? What might this progression reveal about Milton’s vision of true authority and love?*

Student responses:

- Question 1.
    - Milton's portrayal of the Son can be seen in Adam & Eve's character development.
        - At first they feel miserable. But after Christ intervenes, they understand justice & mercy a little more, and are glad to have had experiences.
        - Shows how the Son can change us, and how Milton thinks He can.
            - We can overcome human limitations through growth through the Son.
    - Amy brought up a quote from *Paradise Lost*, that was smth like, "He who comes shall destroy Satan, not by destroying Satan himself, but by destroying his works."
    - Courtney brought up an excerpt including the last time the Son/Christ is referenced explicitly. It comes right after the last time Satan is mentioned.
        - (Satan is rarely ever mentioned in the last books w/o the Son being referenced, too. This ties back into Amy's comment that Christ is always there to bring us out of Satan's craft.)
        - Once Adam learns the Son is his savior, an angel says, "This, having learned, thou has attained the sum of wisdom."
        - Ian added onto it: Book 12, Line 585: "Then wilt thou not be loathed to leave this paradise, but shall possess a paradise within thee, happier far."
            - Wait that's kinda so deep actually.

### Satan

Courtney's questions:

1. *What do you make of the absence of Satan in the end of Paradise Lost?*
2. *What might Milton be saying through Satan's character?*

Responses:

- Perhaps Satan's absence is indicative that they've cast Satan out of their lives.
- Amy noted: In the beginning of the book, Satan is set up like he's about to be the hero of the story. But it's a cool approach to take him out in the end to reinforce that it's not about Satan, it's about the savior and the relationship between Him and Adam & Eve.
- Stuart (Stewart?) noted: Satan has a big role in the beginning, but he leaves when the battle btwn good & evil falls to Adam & Eve (rather than btwn him & his angels and God & His).
- Some said: Satan's absence is kinda like today. Satan doesn't want you to know he exists, he doesn't want you to think your sins as evil.
    - Courtney connected that to how Satan appeared as an innocent snake. He didn't want his evil acts to be connected to his personage.
- There's a part Courtney wanted to show us that wasn't in the assigned reading.
- Courtney directed us to pg. 246 where Satan is last mentioned.
    - pg. 247. Book 10, lines 485: "Him by frought I have seduced from his creator, and the more to increase his wonder, with an apple." 
        - Satan's last moments highlight his wickedness. He's boasting. "Look at what I did&mdash;and with just an apple!!!!!"
- "Punished in the shape he sinned. For now we are all snakes, smth smth smth smth in his riot." Satan is now unable to talk. Nothing but a hiss. Unable to walk, too.
    - Does "Paradise Lost" refer to the paradise Adam & Eve lost, or the one that Satan lost?

### God

Questions

1. *Is he embodied? Good question–no, he is described as an invisible, blinding light. Any action must be carried out by his Son. Instead, he embodies pur reason, justice, other core values.* 
2. *How does Milton represent God? How does Adam and Eve view Him? Is he loving? Vengeful? What does this tell you about beliefs on God (rulers) during this time?* 
3. *If the purpose of Paradise Lost was that Milton might “assert Eternal Providence / And justify the ways of God to men.” What are His ways that have been revealed? And what might Milton be trying to say?*

Responses:

- Someone when we were first being introduced to this text had asked if God is ever embodied. He is not. He is described as this blinding light. And He has angels, including Christ, do His work physically.
- Themes of love/mercy are connected to Christ, themes of justice are connected to God.
    - One student noted that God seems oddly limited. 
        - e.g. God had to withdraw His presence from Adam.
        - While Christ gives love unbounded, God has to withdraw His love (as acc to justice) so that Christ's atonement will work.
        - God can't always fulfill every need, bc that's how justice works.
            - She brought up a quote where God doesn't look at Adam & Eve. Was He unable to look, or too weary to?
- Courtney said that God limited His power because He gave some of His power to His children/creations.
    - He chooses the plan that gives His people the most freedom. Milton, Courtney argues, is demonstrating what he thinks leaders should do.
        - Sage says this is supported from sections from Milton's personal prose. (e.g. pro divorce, pro freedom of the press.) This is undoubtedly linked to how he chose to frame God in his story.
            - Ian added: Early in book 3, they're talking about the plan, and they're talking about this idea of freewill/agency. 
                - "Freely they stood, and fell they fell." God decides not to make them 100% obedient, bc how could their obedience mean anything if they did not choose it?
                - "So I formed them free, and free they must remained, lest they enthrall themselves...lest I revoke their freedom and change the higher creed." They *have* to be free.
- Courtney noted providence. Somewhere in book 1, it's capitalized, with an insightful footnote saying "Providence" is the stand-in for God & His plan. And then Providence is mentioned again, capitalized, in Book 12: "Some natural tears they dropped, but wiped them soon. The world was all before them, where to choose their place of rest, and Providence their guide."

### Adam & Eve

- Eve was the one to seek forgiveness first. She made peace with her sin first. She approached Adam, who was like, "No, I still hate you." Eventually he came to as well, but she was the first one to show love again.
- Many different ways to interpret how Eve was deceived. While she was the first one to fall, Adam VERY quickly followed after her. What does that say about him?
- One student noted how she never loved how Adam & Eve deflect responsibility after partaking of the fruit. ("The serpent beguiled me," "Eve did it first.") But by the end, Eve was accepting her . But the student noted that Adam didn't, and she wishes he did, to show that equal partnership. (She was thinking about her own marriage, how if she expressed guilt about something they both did and he went, "Yeah," that would be crazy.) Throughout media/literature, women are portrayed as apologetic, and men less so. That's not to say we should apologize. But there is a significant unbalance.
- Sage said *Paradise Lost* reinforced a (non-doctrine) thing that was told to her about women and the priesthood when she was young. She was told there is an equal division of gifts btwn men & women: Men get the authority of the priesthood, and women get to bear children! How amazing is it that womens' wombs can do that? She brought up a lot of moments in *Paradise Lost* that reinforced this kind of thinking.
    - e.g. Adam is given info ab how he will achieve salvation...and he is told to tell Eve. (Why not tell Eve directly??)
    - Another student gave an example: When Michael is talking to Adam, Eve is just...asleep?

## Why do you teach this book?

One student asked Courtney, When someone unfamiliar with *Paradise Lost* asks you about it, what do you tell them? Why teach it?

Courtney brought up the passage of time. There is always darkness. Her son recently asked her, "Has there ever been a time in history where there wasn't war?" They looked into it. There's not.

Humanity is constantly battling throughout history. Wars between nations, battles between people. Adam & Eve thought their fate was doomed, but in the end they learn there was hope. They walk towards hope with God leading them.

Humanity is still fighting the same fights and making the same mistakes we've made for millenia. What can we learn from these older texts?