2025 09 24  
CS 256: Human-Computer Interaction  
Amanda Hughes  
Data Gathering: Interviewing & Context Inquiry  

# Administrivia

- Box demo day today in lab
    - First required lab session &mdash; attendance will be taken
- HW: Figma tutorial &mdash; due Fri @ Midnight
    - This is just to start getting us familiar w/ Figma.
- Investigation 3 due next Wed (10/1)

# Interviews

Interviews are part of the **Observation** step in the four-stage cycle of design.

- Structured
    - A bit like a survey. 
    - You just run through a list of questions.
- Open-ended or unstructured
    - Opposite of structured.
    - Much harder to do w/o experience. (You'll oft just go down rabbit holes and won't get good info ab it.)
- Semi-structured
    - Guide of questions you want to ask, but flexible in that you'll follow tangents if you think they're interesting (or where you won't ask one of your prepared questions if you don't think it's relevant).
- Contextual inquiry
    - Where you follow that person doing the task that you're interested in.
    - e.g. you might shadow someone at their work.
- Group (e.g. focus group)
    - Interviewing individual people can be time consuming.
    - Benefits: More peoples opinions at once.
    - Drawbacks: Some people can dominate the conversation...so you might only get one or a few opinions after all.

## How to conduct interview

Everyone can learn to interview! ...But most people aren't naturally good interviewers.

There's a lot more to it if you need to learn to do it and do it well, but for today we're just doing a crash course to make us prepared enough 

- No leading questions.
    - Leading questions = asking a question in a way that incites a specific response.
    - e.g. political surveys: "Do you want to PUNISH THE CHILDREN with this law!??!?"
    - Happens a lot if you're attached to your prototype. 
- Avoid yes/no questions.
    - Caveat: You *can* ask a yes/no question, but you should always ask *why*&mdash;ask the responder to explain their answer.
    - Yes/no just doesn't give you very much (nor very good) info.
    - If all you care ab is yes/no questions, just do a survey. 
- Questions should not be abstract&mdash;they should drive at real *situated activity*.
    - Base your questions in what they're doing.
    - e.g. app for weightlifters: Helpful to ask questions like "What exercises do you do?", "What weight do you lift?". What might be less helpful is smth like, "How often do you work out?"
- Avoid jargon or complex language.

### Leading Questions

Hughes says it's very easy to end up asking leading questions w/o intending to. She says she finds herself doing it all the time.

- Biased/Leading question: "Wasn't the process of signing up much smoother this time?"
- Neutral question: "What was your experience like when signing up for our service? Were there any aspects that stood out to you, either positively or negatively?"
- Biased: "Wasn't it frustrating to navigate through our old menu system?"
- Neutral: "How would you describe your experience navigating through our menu system, both in the past and currently?"

You want to pose the question so that any answer&mdash;positive or negative&mdash; is a valid response.

Most of the time, when you're interviewing, people will want to please you. They'll want to respond in a way that they think is what you're looking for.

## How to collect data in an interview

- Notes
    - Def important, but it's hard to take notes that are legible and capture the whole conversation WHILE you're doing the interview&mdash;especially if you're the only interviewer.
- Audio
    - Make sure you get interviewee's consent.
- Video
    - Probs not needed for this class.


## Professionalism

- **Dress the part.** Dress to suit the situation you're in.
    - Good rule of thumb for interviewing: **One dress level above.**
          - e.g. if you're interviewing professional workers in a resturaunt, don't show up in a jeans and T-shirt.
          - You want to look like you're taking it at least as seriously as them&mdash;ideally more.
    - EXCEPTION: For pure ethnographic observation, blend in.
    - EXCEPTION: If you're interviewing a group that you need to make more comfortable. (e.g. children, seniors, ddifferent ethnic or cultural groups, etc.)
- Demeanor
    - Mind your facial expressions.
        - Interviewers are often unaware of it.
        - Nothing will shut down an interview faster than looking disgusted at what an interviewee is saying.
        - Plus: In an interview is not when you want to argue ab stuff if they say something you agree with.
    - Encourage subtle feedback w/ expression. 
        - e.g. "Hmm." "Ahh!" "That's interesting!"
        - This is conversation 101 but sometimes we forget it during interviews, where we get locked in on consuming their response.
        - Don't overdo it tho.
    - Maintain eye contact.
        - Of course, don't do it creepily. (But no eye contact is weird, too.)
    - Mind your body language.
        - A lot of the time if we're bored, it comes out in our body language.
            - Avoid slouching, looking at your phone, etc.
        - When you are having an interview w/ someone, you want to act like they're the most interesting person in the world.

## Ethnographic Methods

- Interviews.
- Focus groups.
- Direct observation.
    - It's known you're there to observe.
- Indirect observation.
    - You blend in and observe.
    - Done in public places.
- Contextual inquiry.

## Ethics

- Informed consent.
    - Make sure to get permission from your interviewee.
    - Make sure they KNOW what they're getting themselves into.
- Internal Review Board (IRB).
    - If we want to study human behavior, we have to go through a rigorous process of applying and making sure what we're asking people to do is ethical...all that jazz.

## Video: How not to conduct an interview

[How not to conduct an interview](https://youtu.be/U4UKwd0KExc)

- Distractions: Phone, watch. Was not paying attention.
- No follow-up questions.
- Appeared to make interviewee uncomfortable.
- Did not care ab feedback at the end.


# Contextual Inquiry

We don't have enough time to cover contextual inquiry in full today, so we'll continue next time.

"The core premise of Contextual Inquiry is very simple: Go where the customer works, observe the customer as they work, and talk to the customer about the work. Do that, and you can't help but gain a better understanding of your customer." (Replace "customer" w/ "user".)

Interviews take people outside the context where they're working. W/ a CI, you're observing them *in* their context.

## Design from Data

"The user is not like us." We need data to understand the user and their work.

### Summaries vs. Ongoing Experience

- Retrospective accounts are oft summaries.
    - "I got to work, checked my email, and had a cup of coffee."
- By being present in the time & place of the activity, we can access much richer data from ongoing activities.
    - "I got to work, looked over my email, answered messages from my boss, decided to have some coffee, walked to the coffee machine, saw there was no coffee, and made myself some coffee."

### Abstract vs. Concrete

- Humans have a tendency to abstract.
- This reduces amount of quality of data in CI.
- Focus on real tasks & artifacts.

## What to look for

- Body language is huge.
    - Signs of frustration.
        - Sighs.
        - Rolling of eyes.
        - Offhand, under the breath comments.
        - Confessions.
            - "I'm supposed to be doing it this way, but I'm doing it this way instead, hahahaha."
- Workarounds.
    - If something doesn't work the way it's supposed to work, we'll oft do stuff to get around it, w/o even realizing.
- Mismatch btwn what people say vs. do.