2025 09 17  
CS 256: Human Computer Interaction  
Amanda Hughes  
Memory and Knowledge in the Head & World

# Knowledge in the head vs. world

## Knowledge in the world

- Perceived affordances.
    - e.g. in Disneyland, anything that looks like you can sit on, people will sit on it.
- Signifiers.
- Mappings btwn controls & results.
    - We expect that our light switches will map in a logical way to the lights we control.
- Physical constraints.
    - Help us understand how we can use the world.
    - e.g. exit signs only placed leading to or above doors. 

## Knowledge in the head

Things that we memorize or understand.

- Conceptual models.
- Cultural semantic.
    - Learned knowledge.
        - May differ from other communities/cultures.
    - e.g. in the US, we all drive on the right-hand side of the rode.
    - e.g. in India they make a head motion to indicate they're listening that, to us from the US, looks like they're shaking their head no.
- Logical constraints.
- Analogies btwn current situation & previous experiences.
    - e.g. finding a classroom you've never been to before, you'd use your previous experiences of finding rooms on campus. (e.g. the first digit being 1 == floor 1.)

## Knowledge in the head vs. world in the scripture

Knowledge in the world: scriptures, prophets, etc.

Knowledge in the head: memorized scripture, conceptual models of the plan of salvation, personal revelation, relationship w/ Christ, etc.


# Memory (DMM Ch. 7)

## Long term memory functions

- Semantic: facts & relationships.
    - Berlin is capital of Germany.
        - Norman: This is "declarative".
- Episodic: past events.
    - Fell down and bonked my head.
- Procedural: action sequences.
    - Karate move.
        - Norman: This is "procedural".

## Short term memory

- Combination of phenomena
    - Perception
    - Attention
    - Retrieval from long term memory
        - Re-activated through recognition/recall
- We call this combination-
    - "Working memory"

### Examples

We went through a bunch of examples where Prof would show a sequence of numbers or words on the board, and we'd have to write them down after she hid them. It was pretty cool.

Here's the takeaways:

- Short term memory requires maintained focus.
    - e.g. at one point she asked us to say our phone number backwards before writing the sequence of numbers she had shown us. We did very bad on that one.
- We often use tricks to remember things.
    - e.g. remembering `0 2 4 6 8 10 12` was pretty easy, bc we could just tell ourselfs "counting by two from zero to twelve" instead of having to remember each number.
- We can remember a sentence, especially a colloquialism, easier than a sequence of random words.

## Passwords

[Video](https://www.facebook.com/watch/?v=773194040139805)

## What do these observations ab memory mean for design?

This was a discussion question. Some answers include:

- Make stuff simple.
    - KISS principle&mdash;Keep It Simple, Stupid.
- We need to slowly introduced info to users instead of bombarding them w/ info.
- Design so that it minimizes the work users have to use w/ their short-term memory.
- Frequency of use of your application matters: if they're using it once a year, you can't rely on your user remembering anything. But if they use it frequently, you can.


# Summary

- Use constraints & knowledge (in the head or in the world) to eliminated the need to remember exact instructions.
- When using knowledge in the world, ensure that the knowledge is easy to translate.
- When requiring knowledge in the head, be cognizant of how much you are asking users to remember and take advantage of meaningful struture like mental models. 