2025 09 03  
CS 256: Intro to HCI  
Amanda Hughes  
DAY ONE: INTRO


# Prof Info

> Prof: Amanda Hughes  
> amanda_hughes@byu.edu  
> 3364 TMCB  
> Office hrs: Mon & Wed 10 AM - 11:50 AM during lab sessions (4722 HBLL), or by appointment.

> TA: Kamea  
> kamea99@student.byu.edu  

### Professional history

- CS BA from BYU
- Master's & PhD from U of Colorado (CS)
    - First class took was a HCI class&mdash;first HCI she ever had. Loved it bc when she was a developer she'd develop tools in isolation, so the idea that you can involve your users *while* you're developing was a crazy idea for her. Fell in love with the idea of combining the technical aspects w/ the social aspects of computing. Bc at teh end of the day, **people are using our tools.**
- Assistant Prof, USU (CS)
- Assistant prof, BYU (IT&C)
- Associate Prof, BYU (IT&C)
- Associate Prof, BYU CS

Fourth year in the BYU CS department, 8th year @ BYU.

Research: HCI & Crisis Informatics: Looking at how people use social media during disasters.

### Hobbies

Hiking, RVing, crafting, piano (constantly called as a Primary pianist), clarinet (almost majored in music), singing (in a couple choirs), gaming (digital & board games).

Recently got a motor home & a jeep, so they've been doing outdoorsy stuff.

### Family

Met husband at BYU (Elec En major), met him in the digital logic class (she was one of three women in that class lol). 

2 daughters (16 & 8).

# Class Info

## Wtf is HCI?

*"Human-computer Interaction is a discipline concerned w/ the **design**, **evaluation**, & **implementation** of interactive computing systems for human use and with the study of major phenomena surrounding them."*

Any time you have a human & a computer interacting, there is HCI involved...which means basically all the time. As such, HCI people study everything under the sun. 

Hughes says HCI is a core principle for CS workers to understand. Even if you step away from this class not planning to be a UX designer, these are important concepts to know for any person in CS. 

### HCI vs. UX

There is not a fine line btwn UX and HCI. It's fuzzy&mdash;maybe more like a venn diagram really.

HCI is more of an academic term to encompass all the research that happens. 

UX is more of an industry term where you play a specific role designing interfaces.

## This course is for you if you want to...

- Stop blaming yourself for making mistakes when using software applications (and other everyday things).
    - (There is no such thing as user error.)
- Critically evaluate the role of software applications in everyday life and in society at large.
- Be a responsible software developer who creates useful and usable software.
    - **If your software is not usable, people will not use it.**
- Become a professional interaction designer or HCI researcher.

## Course Purpose

*Students will become more thoughtful, empathetic observers of the world that can design technology user experiences that make a meaningful difference in people's lives.*

Hughes says the reason she loves HCI so much is it gives her the opportunity to make things that directly help people.

## Human-centered design

(Foreshadowing what this class will be all about.)

Stages:

1. Analysis
2. Design
3. Evaluation
4. Implementation

(There's all sorts of different models for "human-centered design", but they all typically follows these rough ideas.)

## Divine design

*"The Lord's hand is guiding you. By 'divine design,' He is in the small details of your life as well as the major milestones."* &mdash; From "By Divine Design" by Elder Ronald A. Rasban.d

Hughes says the iterative cycle of trying something out, seeing what works, and trying again happens all the time in her life. And it often feels like there is a divine hand gently guiding her the whole time. e.g. she neeever anticipated she'd become a professor: she wanted to graduate as fast as possible, until some experiences made her realize that she actually likes school.

## Bad design vs. good design

We're pretty good at recognizing bad design. For that reason, a lot of what we'll learn in this class will be pretty intuitive, but it will sit there in your conscious brain as a tool for making good design. 

# Logistics

This class will involve **no programming**. (We'll be using prototyping tools instead.)

## Course Syllabus

### Tools we're using

    - **Canvas** for class materials & assignments.
    - **Discord** for course discussion, clarifications, & help.
        - Link in syllabus.
    - **Figma** for UI prototyping.
        - Free student accounts.
        - Used a lot in industry.

### Readings

- Don Norman: *Design of Everyday Things*
    - REQUIRED
- Jeff Johnson: *Designing with the Mind in Mind: A Simple Guide to Understanding User Interface Design Guidelines*
    - REQUIRED
    - ISBN: 9780128182024
    - Available for free on HBLL website.
- Other select readings (will be provided for you)
    - usability.gov
    - Selected articles from the ACM Digital Library.
    - Selected books chapters & sections.
    - Selected articles from blogs and online magazines.

### Preparation Assignments (10% of grade)

- Readings (or occasionally videos) due at beginning of class.
- Self report your percentage.
    - Reading/watching 80% == prepared.
    - Ask questions.
- Submit through Canvas.
    - Two lowest scores dropped.
- Typically one for every class day.

These are so you can be prepared for the concepts to be discussed in class.

### Student engagement

This class is unusual (especially for a CS class) bc it is very collaborative & interactive.

- Discussions, collaborative activities, hands-on excercises, group work, w/ occasional lecture.
    - **(If you don't like group work, this class may not be for you.)**
    - Semester-long group project.
- Classes are held in person.
    - First hour: Meet together in class. (Slides via Pear Deck.)
    - Second hour: Labs. (Getting hands-on experience.)
        - Sometimes there's a delay getting to the lab immediately after class. So Hughes says lab will start once she gets there.

Sometimes we won't meet in class. So averaged over the semester, it averages out to 3 hrs/wk.

### Lab Participation (5% of grade)

When we start group work, lab time is essential.

- Lab hour attendance will be taken when group work begins.
    - This is only for required labs (which will be clearly indicated on Canvas).

<br>

- Full credit (5%)
    - No more than one unexcused absence in one required lab.
- Partial score (2.5%)
    - No more than two unexcused absences in a required lab.
- Zero score (0%)
    - More than two unexcused absences in a required lab where group participation is expected.

### Unexcused Absences

They happen. Must be a valid thing.

Communicate to your prof (and your team!) that you'll be gone.

### Individual Investigations (30% of grade)

Details in syllabus & Canvas.

### Group Investigations (40% of grade)

Within that 40% is 25% that weighs your personal contribution to your group project.


### Final Project Deliverables

No final exam, instead it's final deliverables.

- Presentation.
- Personal reflection.
- Individual submission.
    - (You explain what *you* did on the project.)

### Midterm Exam (15% of grade)

Done online through Canvas. (Typically you have ~1wk to complete it.)

### Late work

- Late work will be accepted up until the last day of class.
- Deduction: 10% off per school day, to a maximum of -50%.
    - (Which means that you can still turn stuff in on the last day of class.)
    - The uprpose of leniency is to encourage you to do it. 

## Canvas

Links to slides will be posted to Canvas after class.