2025 09 29  
Human-Computer Interaction  
Amanda Hughes  

# Intro

## Opening question

*What was your favorite thing about President Nelson?*

RIP Pres Nelson 1924-2025 :(

(No like fr I'm actually so sad he's gone. Ngl half of my testimony of the church for the last few years has been, "If there's a church whose leader is someone God wants to lead His church, it'd be Pres Nelson.")

Man especially during today's political climate, his emphasis on being peacemakers is really needed. I worry.

Other students said:

- He spoke a ton of languages.
- One student appreciated his urgency.
- Another student appreciated his sense of humor.
    - Said he saw so much more ab Pres Nelson than you normally do w/ apostles/prophets.
- Another student (Alex) talked about how Pres Nelson's teachings rly helped him to consider what he wanted to put first in his life.

Hughes noted that a lot of what we care about in HCI is building empathy with people. And Pres Nelson was a really good example of someone who did that.

## Administrivia

- Investigation 3 due Wed (Oct 1)
- Wednesday labs: Organize project groups
    - **MAKE IT TO CLASS ON WED!!!!**
- HW: Mastering Figma components: Due Fri @ midnight.
    - If you learn how to use Figma components, it will make your life a LOT easier, Hughes said. So she's having us watch a video that specifically goes over that.
    - For these assignments, follow along as closely as you need to understand the concepts. Hughes says you don't have to be constantly pausing the video and replicating what you see on screen.

# Interviews / Contextual Inquiry (cont...)

Refresher: Interviews are out of context, Contextual Inquiry is in context.

## 7 ways to mess up CI

- Not being inquisitive (i.e. "nosy") enough.
    - As they're doing things, they're probs going to have a tendency to explain what they're doing. You're task is oft to be like, "Tell me what you're doing here," "Why did you click that button instead of this one?"
- Overly disrupting the task.
    - On the other hand, you don't want to be overly disrupting.
    - e.g. making a five minute task take an hour bc you're asking so many questions.
- Turning it into a regular interview.
- Failing to respect your participants.
- Failing to observe and take good notes.
- Focusing on the wrong details.
    - You usually want to come into a CI with a task or set of tasks you're trying to support, so that you're not detailing the wrong story about a cat.
    - Filter out extraneous details.
- Slipping into abstraction.
    - What we want in CI is the focused details of how they're doing the task in the moment, using real examples from what you're looking at and directly observing.

## Why one over the other?

If CI is so rich, why favor an interview over it?

Students said:

- Extra effort from CI might not be pertinent, or extra details might not be relevant. Depends on the stage of what you're building/planning.
- If you're needing more of an internal view, you can't get that as much from a CI, bc you're focused on the external details.
- Some things are used in contexts that mean a CI isn't allowed. e.g. security clearances, or privacy laws for like therapists or smth idk.

Hughes said:

Most people end up doing a lot of interviews, and most of that comes down to convenience. Interviews are typically faster and easier to get people to agree to do.

# User Modeling: Scenarios and personas

Hughes had us watch a video about story-telling for our HW. (I, uh... I didn't watch it.) 

If you can tell a good story, that usually can help you design a good tool.

1. Persona
    - Defines *who* the story is about. 
    - This main character has attitudes, motivations, goals, weaknesses, etc.
2. Scenario
    - Defines when/where/how the story of the persona takes place.
    - The scenario is the narrative of how the persona behaves in a sequence of events.
3. Goal
    - Defines the what the persona wants or needs to fulfill.
    - The goal is the motivation of why the persona is taking action.
    - Once the goal is fulfilled, the story ends.


## Personas

Personas are, like, your imaginary characters you make representing your users.

- Capture a set of user characteristics. (User profile.)
    - Depending on your intended audience, you might have multiple different personas.
        - e.g. Microsoft Word.
- You do user research to understand people. Personas are synthesized from real people based on user research.
- Typical, not idealized.
- Bring to life 
    - Name, characteristics, goals, and personal background.
    - People will oft use a stock picture to represent that person, too, and stuff.

The point of personas is to get you into the frame of mind of your user, especially if that user is different from you. The idea is it is easier to put yourself in someone's shoes if you have someone with shoes to put yourself in.

Hughes said sometimes companies will make these personas and paste them on the wall in meeting rooms. Then during meetings, they'll use them as reference&mdash;"What do you think this persona will think of this new feature?"

When you're creating personas, you're trying to create an amalgamation of data from your user research. Don't base it on a single person.

### Req. for personas

- Relevant to product under development.
- Good personas help designer w/ design decisions & reminds the team about who will use the product.
    - It can be easy to lose sight of who your user actually is.
- Develop a small set of personas, typically w/ one primary.
    - You typically only want to have 2-3, w/ one being your primary persona.
        - (Especially for this class.)

### Examples

(I took screenshots.)

From the example Hughes showed us, it's very possible any of the options Hughes presented could be things the student cares about. But it's important when making personas that you refrain from casting interpretations on your personas, making sure to draw only from real, user data (in this case, "always on the go").

## Scenarios

### Definition

- Short story that details a specific user's interaction w/ a product to achieve a goal, including their motivations, actions, and challenges.
- Lots of diff formats: Textual descriptions, animations, audio, video, etc.


### Examples

(I took screenshots.)

Hughes noted that it's really tempting to explain *how* users interact w/ their product in your story. But scenarios are not meant for that. Scenarios are higher level, focusing on what the product is supposed to accomplish. (How it accomplishes that is up to designers further down the line.)

e.g. in the second example, Hughes noted how it says "He specificies that he wnats $100", not "He taps on the 'withdraw' button and types in $100 and then puts in his credit card and..."

Third example was a storyboard. In this example, there were *some* specifics with how the user uses the app, but that's because they're showcasing a specific solution to a problem. They still leave the details pretty generic.

## Why use storytelling?

Hughes contrasts storytelling to "user requirements" that companies often use. While those are helpful, they're oft sterile, so it can be hard to empathize w/ your user when that's all you have. 

We as designers are all about empathy. Having personas and scenarios helps us a lot to get into that empathetic headspace.