2025 10 06  
CS 256  
Amanda Hughes  
Caleb Hessing

# Administrivia

## Upcoming

- Investigation 4 due Wed (Oct 8)
- Master Figma Layout due Friday (Oct 10)

# Task Analysis in design cont...

## Using tasks in design

"Task" = something a user would want to do with your app.


- Write up a description of the tasks.
- Produce scenarios or a storybosard covering tasks.
- Rough out an interface design.

^ This is the kind of stuff we'll be doing soon for Investigation 4. (Or maybe it was a different assignment idk tbh.)

### Minimum viable product

For the prototyping stage, you want to reduce your application to the key tasks that make your app your app.

This might not even include stuff like a login screen or a settings menu.

### 1. Writing up a description

- Formally or informally written.
- We want to figure out what those tasks are so we can run it by our design team and also (ideally) run it by users.
- Get more information where needed.

#### Tasks for dream recorder

- record
- play
- share... 
- delete
- analyze?
- organize 

### 2. Produce scenarios or storyboard covering tasks

Ngl I didn't realize she had change the slides so I have no notes on this RIP.

### 3. Rough out an interface design

- Discard features that don't support your tasks.

bruh she moved the slide too fast.

It's really tempting to start by jumping into Figma. But starting with a rough (even poorly drawn) prototype first is really helpful actually. Just a quick rough to show what options are available to a user and how they interact.

# Prototyping

*"Quick prototyping is about acting before you've got the answers, about taking chances, stumbling a little, but then making it right."* - Tom Kelly, *The Art of Innovation*

## Benefits of lo-fidelity prototyping

"lo-fidelity" = simple, rough. e.g. drawing it out on piece of paper.

- Cheap.
- Modular.
- Don't get attached to the idea.
- Focus on functionality over form.
- Benficial for your prototype user, too.
    - People tend to pick apart your color choices, etc. when you hand them like a Figma prototype or smth.

## Paper prototyping

- Start with sketching.
    - Start sketching after you conduct your reseearch.
    - Sketching can be overviews that become progressively more details.
    - Wireframes organize information into large blocks.
        - VGisually consider lots of different layouts.
    - Then get more detailed.

The idea is that you start low detail, then add detail while guided by user response. Or smth like that. (I'm not locked in.)

## Wireframes

Wireframes. You're just mocking out the areas and sections of elements of your application.  