2025 09 15  
CS 256  
Amanda Hughes  
Psychology of Actions

# Administrivia

Investigation 1 due **tonight**.

Next class (Wednesday), we'll be presenting our Investigation 1 posters today.

# HCI's Roots in Cognitive Psychology

## Cognition

Cognition = how do we think, how do we remember, how do we learn, how does our seeing tie into our thought process, how do we talk, etc. etc. 

All related to the brain.

*How To Design With the Mind in Mind*, which we had our first reading for due today, focuses a lot on cognition.

### How can understanding cognition help

- Provides knowledge ab what users can and cannot be expected to do.
    - e.g. How quickly can a user respond to stimulus.
- Identifies and explains the nature & causes of problems that encounter.
    - e.g. Color blindness. 
- Provides theories, modeling tools, guidance, & methods that can lead to the design of better interactive products.

## Norman: Gulfs of Execution and Evaluation

[Video w/ Don Norman](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bg4UwyPPZ6U)


- Execution: How do I know what to do?
    - **Discoverability**.
- Evaluation: How do I know what happened?
    - **Feedback**.

The gulf of execution is pointed from the user towards the world. *How do I use this system?*

The gulf of evaluation is pointed from the world towards the user. *What's the system's current state?*

### 7 Stages of Action

1. What do I want to accomplish?
2. What are my alternatives?
3. What can I do now?
4. How do I do it?
5. What just happened?
6. What does what just happened mean?
7. Is what just happened OK? Have I accomplished my goal?

^ These questions are not asked linearly, and not all of them are conscious. They simply provide a checklist for designers


### When have you encountered a large gulf of execution?

Turning on cruise control in different cars for me. 

- When using a brand new graphing calculator.
- Opening someone's front gate. (lol)
- Trying to navigate Photoshop.
- Folding down a jogging stroller.
- Automatic sink w/ really weird sensor placement.
- Trying to use the terminal for the first ttime.

### When have you encountered a large gulf of evaluation?

Other times.

## Norman: Human thought (mostly subconcious)

- SUBCONCIOUS:
    - Fast, automatic.
    - Uses multiple resources.
    - Controls skilled behavior.

Most of our actions are the result of subconscious thought. 

<br>

- CONSCIOUS:
    - Slow, controlled.
    - Uses limited resources.
    - Invoked in novel situations (because we don't have a learned reaction yet):
        - learning
        - danger
        - things go wrong
        - etc.

Both conscious and subconscious are necessary. And both can err.


## Norman: Emotion

- "Emotion and cognition are tightly intertwined."
- "Emtion interacts w/ cognition biochemically."
- Positive (relaxed) emotional state is good for creative thought.
- Negative (tense) emotional state is good for getting things done.

[funny video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2H7NZ0GNIIE)

## Limits to our attention

[Movie perception test: The illusion of memory](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2H7NZ0GNIIE)

- Change blindness: don't notice changes.
- Illusion of memory: people are confident there weren't changes.

We think we have a good memory, but our memory actually makes a lot of shortcuts.

### DMM Ch. 8

- Humans have limited attention capacity.
- **Selective attention**: Focusing on relevant stimuli while ignoring others.
- **Change blindness**: Users often fail to notice visual changes.
- **Attention blink**: Short lapse in noticing information after focusing on something else.
    - Why we don't text & drive.
- **Cognitive load**: Minimize distractions to guide user focus.
- Design tips: Use clear layouts, strong visual hierarchy, and minimal interruptions.


## Psychology behind irration decisions

[TED-Ed video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V2EMuoM5IX4)

- Heuristics
    - **Loss aversion**.
        - Negative psychological impact we feel when losing something is ~2x as strong as the positive impact we feel when gaining something.
    - **Conjunction fallacy**.
    - **Anchoring effect**.

We can't turn off our heuristics, but we can learn to be aware of them. Next time you encounter numbers, probability, or a choice w/ multiple options & details, consider that the intuitive answer might not be the right one after all.


From the book:

- **"Losses mean more to us than gains."**
- **"We are biased by how choices are worded."**
    - e.g. paying more attention to Amazon products w/ "Amazon's choice".
- **"We are biased by our vivid imaginations & memories."**
    - e.g. a Nintendo Switch ad featuring young boys playing vidoe games at a sleepover. (Meant to play on nostalgia.)
    - e.g. fast food ads vs. reality.
- Appeals to our emotion.
- Aids in decision support.
- Tries to persuade.

# Final Discussion Question

*Why is it important to understand how our thinking can be irrational and persuaded by design?*

# Box assignment

Groups of 2-3, or individually.

Take a box, and take three verbs, and design the box in such a way that users will naturally want to interact with it (in those three verbs).

You will observe three people (from outside this class) interacting this box. 

Grading will be based not on your success w/ getting people to interact w/ the box in the way you want, but rather on your analysis & reflection afterward on how to improve it. 