2025 09 10  
CS 256  
Amanda Hughes  
DAY THREE


# Norman's Principles of Interaction (Design of Everyday Thing)

Previous class (which I missed):

- Signifiers: Showing what actions you can take.
- Feedback: Showing how the device is functioning.
- Affordance: Relationship btwn object & user. 
    - All signifiers are affordances, but not all affordances are signifiers???
    - (Affordances are often invisible.)
- Mapping: 
    - Being able to tell where you are in an interface.
- Constraints: Constrain the # of actions you can do w/ an object.
    - e.g. you don't want your user putting weird things in CD drives.
    - Constrain the # of choices to help the user make the right one.

This class:

- Conceptual Models: Simple explanations of how something works.
- System image: Information available to us about the design.


*Have you ever been confused by how something worked because your expectation didn't match reality?*

i.e. your conceptual model of how something worked didn't match reality.

## Conceptual Models

i.e. "Mental models"

DEF: Simplified explanation of how something works. It's our conception of how something works. 

e.g. we have a CM of steering wheels: turn the wheel left, the car turns left. Turn the wheel right, the car turns right. But in reality, there's nothing forcing the car to work this way.

Different users may have different CMs based on:

1. How they use a product.
2. Their skill level.
   1. For most users w/ most products, they shouldn't need to have a high skill level to interact w/ the product.


### Building the user's CM

We oft use metaphors/analogies that can use users' real life experiences to inform their CM of a product.

e.g. desktop: file cabinets (folders), documents, literal calendar, etc. (Alan Kay / Xerox Parc, 1976; or General Magic's Magic Cap, 1994.)

e.g. sending secure emails: Some email systems add a window that says "Encryping" w/ a loading bar. This is actually an artificial delay. It was added for extra feedback so users would know fs that their email was being sent securely.

### Requirements of CM

CMs don't have to be complete, they just have to be usable.

Designers often have a different CM than the user, which is where the difficulty lies.

### Spiritual Thought

Sometimes in life, our understanding (CM) doesn't match God's (true system image). His ways are higher, and His design has a purpose&mdash;even when we don't see it right away. 

"For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord." Isaiah 55:8.

*Can you think of a time when God's design for your life turned out better than your plan?*

## System Image

DEF: Combined info available to us that helps us form our understanding of an object or system.

- Manual.
- Visual design of object.
- What we've been taught.
- What we understand based on how we've heard others have used the product.

## Paradox of Technology

New tech = More capability + More complexity.

That makes our job as designers *even* harder. Stuff evolves, perceptions change, new features interact in different ways, etc.

e.g. newer microwaves that take five button presses to cook smth for 30 seconds. (Which used to take 1 button press smh.)

e.g. newer cars w/ screen dashboard: less usable now that you *have* to look at the interface to interact with it. (Not good while driving.)

e.g. Photoshop: One student said they used an older version of Photoshop and were baffled by how much easier to use it was, while current Photoshop has a billion features and is so complex it's almost not usuable.

Sometimes, as technology improves, designers end up making sacrifices.