2025 10 20  
CS 291  
David Zappalla  

# RIP Canvas

Canvas is down rn bc of an AWS fault. If Canvas does not come back up soon, he'll give us a whole extra week to turn stuff in. 

Do NOT turn stuff in via email lol. Zappalla doesn't want his inbox flooded.

# Evan Child: Your first year in tech

## About child

- BYU: CS BS + MS, 2003-2004
- UT Austin: MBA 2008
- Evan Child is a Director of Engineering @ Qualtrics.
    - Manage ~50-70 people depending on the day. 
    - In charge of text analytics. 
    - Does tons of cool stuff but Alex was distracting me with his pro-tier button mashing. (Worth it ngl.)

### Career history

- 2004-2010: ExxonMobil
- 2010-2016: Godman Sachs
- 2012-2016: BYU (adjunct prof teaching CS 142 @ BYU SL Center)
- 2016-present: Qualtrics

### Career history fr

- Had a college startup go belly up (dot com days) and ended up having to leave bc the company couldn't pay me anymore.
- Laid off second proffessional job when company ran out of funding.
- Laid off third job when company changed strategy.
- Got a lower GRE score and ended up having to retake and re-apply TWICE to the BYU CS program.
- Got a "lower third" rating one time at ExxonMobil and had to work hard to bring my ratin back up.
- Got waitlisted to the UT Austin MBA program and had to reapply after retaking the GMAT.
- Applied once to Goldman Sachs and didn't get the job.
- Applied once to Qualtrics and didn't get the job&mdash;reapplied a year later.
- Got a missed exepctations one time at Qualtrics. (i.e. poor quarterly rating.)

Survived 9 years in the wilderness btwn BYU victories over Utah!!!!!!!! (Hardest thing ever omg)

Takeaway: CAREERS ARE NON-LINEAR.


## Discussion points for today

- What happens on day 1.
- Understanding your team & company structure.
    - How to assimilate into company culture (where it aligns w/ your values)
- How to communicate and learn fast.
- Compensation & negotiation basics.
- Common pitfalls + how to avoid them.
- Q&A at the end.

## Understanding your first day

- What to expect
    - Lots of paperwork.
    - HR presentation.
    - Laptopt setup.
    - Slack access.
    - IMPOSTER SYNDROME.
- You're NOT expected to know everything.
- YOUR GOAL FOR THE FIRST YEAR: **Build trust and learn how things work.**

### Your first team

- Who's who: Product manager, tech lead, UX, QA, team members.
    - Product manager is a CRUCIAL position. Cultivate a good relationship w/ them.
        - Listen, talk w/ them, etc.
        - When they learn to trust you, they'll come to you w/ their ideas and problems. HUGE for when you're in a software dev environment.
    - Tech lead: They're not going to give you a performance review. They'll help you w/ tech stuff (or smth idk).
    - Manager: Hiring, firing, performance review, etc. Sometimes combined w/ tech lead, depending on team structure.
- Learn the rituals: stand-ups, sprints, retros.
    - "Rituals" describes the way that the team operates.
        - Do you do daily stand ups? Do you do it in person, over zoom, etc.?
    - Stand-ups: Brief meetings (~15 mins), typically in the morning or afternoon. Go over what you did yesterday, what you'll do today, and what your blockers are. (Too oft people start problem solving during these, but that should happen after everyone's back at their desk.)
        - It's like a daily "I need help with this if anyone knows how".
        - Don't be the guy who *refuses* to ask for help. But also don't be the guy who always immediately asks for help. 
    - Sprints: You get together and decide what you're going to do in the next 2-4 wks. (Usually 2 wks, sometimes 4 wks.) 
    - "Retro" == Retrospective: Higher-level assessment of team compared to sprints.
- Find a "friendly expert" to help you navigate informal systems.
    - i.e. MENTOR.

### Building credibility fast

- Be curious and ask questions intelligently.
- Take notes on everything.
- Deliver something small early.
    - Critical.
- Communicate progress proactively.

## Compensation & Negotiation

### Full compensation picture

There's a lot of different aspects to compensation. If you have different offers, it's not always immediately obvious which offer you should choose; because there's more to compensation than salary, and there's more to getting value out of a job than compensation.

- Base pay + bonus + equity + benefits + perks.
- Look beyond salary&mdash;value of insurance, vacation, education budget, etc.
    - "Education budget" == companies that pay literally for your education (Exxon paid for Child's MBA), or also will pay for you to go to conferences, etc.
- FIND A COMPANY THAT WILL INVEST IN YOUR LEARNING.
    - That is more important than salary or benefits or bonuses, etc.
    - They have a culture of code reviews, mentoring, design reviews (system-level architecture design), going to conferences, tuition reimbursment, education budget, etc.
        - Some of that stuff you can't even really find during college.
            - Child stressed design reviews in particular.
        - ASK THIS WHEN INTERVIEWED. (ASIDE: In an interview process, you should always have an opportunity to ask questions, and you should ALWAYS have questions prepare. (ASIDE: ALWAYS COME PREPARED W/ QUESTIONS TO INTERVIEWS. It's SO important for you to understand what the company culture is like.))
        - Ask the interviewer: How has the learning experience been at this company?
        - Sponsoring your masters is rarer now than it used to be (bc it's so competitive they don't have to offer those compensations to win you over), but still some companies (especially bigger ones) have that as a standard compensation.
- Take these into consideration even when you're applying, not just when getting offers. 
- When deciding where to apply, pick the companies that interests you, with people you want to rub shoulders w/ each day, etc. etc.

Aside: What's the purpose of a resume? To get an interview. What's the purpose of an interview? To get a job. (Well, sometimes to another interview, but eventually it's interview to job.) A resume does NOT help you get a job.

### Negotiation Mindset

- Always be respectful and informed.
    - Child noted one time he asked a company about a better salary...without realizing that they had a fixed salary scale for all employees w/ no negotiations ever, and trying to negotiate.
- Wait until you have an offer in hand. Do your research.
- Explain why this offer is preferable to you. (Company culture, growth opportunities, etc.)
- "I was hoping for something closer to X..." > "Can you increase it?"
- Negotiating helps you AND raises the bar for others.

100% do NOT negotiate internships.

e.g. negotiation: Asking to take a day off each week bc you need to attend a class to finish your degree.

Be cautious. Be judicious. But remember: If you pass the interview process, they want you.

Don't worry about your compensation package too much in your early career. You're not going to make much money until you're 40. (Make sure that you make enough, ofc. Use Glassdoor and other websites and talk to your peers to make sure you're not being lowballed.) But have a growth mindset, focus on improving yourself, etc. and your long-term financial compensation will be better.

Another tip: When you have a job, you can be picky.

ASIDE: Wherever you go, as quickly as you can, start to interview other people. It's SO helpful.

ASIDE: Should you be interviewing often? Child isn't a fan of job hopping. But it's still valuable to keep your interviewing skills sharp. So interviewing often isn't bad.

## The Unwritten Rules

- Every company has them. Find out what they are.
- See how people actually use Slack vs. eMail.
- When to speak up, when to listen.
- When to stand up and walk over to someone and talk to their desk.

Child described the difference btwn his different jobs: EM was very risk averse; GS was very process-driven; Qualtrics was...idk I kinda missed it.

Every company has different cultures and different ways of operating.

ASIDE: Remote jobs suck. Esp in your earlier career, you want an in person an environment. The speed at which you can learn, grow, and adapt will be SO much stronger in person. 

## Growth Mindset

Read *Mindset* by Carol Dweck. This was a change-your-life book for Child. It contrasts growth vs. fixed mindsets. It changed the way Child views feedback, how he interacts w/ people, etc.

## Common Pitfalls

### How to stand out

- Be the dev who makes others better.
    - (Volunteer to do code reviews!)
- Show ownership and follow-through.
- Give credit, take responsibility.

## Final takeaways

- Day 1 is NOT about being PERFECT, it's about being COACHABLE.
- Build trust, communicate well, keep learning.
- BYU values apply in the workplace: integrity, service, excellence.

## Connect w/ Child on LinkedIn

https://www.linkedin.com/in/evanchild/


"...God is taking us on a soul-stirring journey with hills and vales and vistas so stunning we can scarcely imagine them until we climb a little higher and there they are before us." - Jeffery R. Holland.

## Q&A

### Building trust. How do you do it?

The trust curve: Starts off growing relatively slowly, then accelerates.

Trust is built by continued small successes. Lots of small acts built over extended period of time.

- First impressions set expectations that can last years.
- Be humble & confidnt.
- Say "I don't know yet, but I'll find out."
    - Zappalla personal story: Talked himself into taking a ward responsibility of knocking on doors and asking if people are coming to church. They liked that so much that they called him to the Stake presidency, which he loved.