2025 09 29  
CS 291  
David Zappalla  


# Announcements 

Career Fair prep: Oct 2

Jared 

Resume Review: TNRB W108 @ 7PM, Sep 30. (cookies provided.)

David Wingate is hiring RA's for his SAIL LAB. (Poli sci + CS, involving AI.) Contact at: wingated@cs.byu.edu  
(I THINK THAT'S PETERSON'S DAD!!!!!!!!!!)

Funeral for Pres Nelson: Tues Oct 7 @ noon. Open to the public (need ticket tho). Instructions for how to get tickets can be found on Church News websites. Broadcast will be held some time after. 

# Misc

CS ANIM 340 &mdash; game design. You don't have to be in Anim to do it.

# Mike on Interviews

Speaker: Member of facutly for six weeks. (WOW!) Previously was VP of AI at Proofpoint, a cybersecurity company specializing in email security (so data security). Probably haven't heard of them bc they do enterprise stuff.

25 year career.

Mike said he is giving us *his* perspective on interviewing. Other people will have different perspectives. He says he hopes we will get other perspectives, too.

## Resumes review

- Concrete numbers. (Called "ROI" in business.)
- Tailor to job description. (Mike emphasized this.)
- Keep it one page.
    - Mike actually said that's changing. For the stage you're at in your career, that's good advice, but the further you go along, two pages still works&mdash;so long as it's **stuff, not fluff**.

## Interview funnel

Here's how interviewing worked at Proofpoint, the (medium-sized (~5,000 employees)) company Mike worked at:

- Resume screening.
    - Remember that the first person that's looking at your resume is probably not the hiring manager (most hiring managers have a recruiter). They are given things to look for, and those are likely tailored to the job description.
        - **For this reason, tailoring your resume to the job description is critical.**
            - Mike even suggested giving ChatGPT (or another AI) your resume and the job description and asking how well they match (and what you could do to make your resume match more).
            - *With that said*, do not lie or exaggerate your skills/experience. They're going to ask you about the things you put on your resume.
                - Be prepared to back up what you know.
                - i.e. D
        - Mike talked ab Proofpoint position opening that got >250 resumes in <48 hrs. 
    - Mike said that he loves working 1-on-1 with students to help improve their resume to be tailored to the job they're applying for.
    - Things that really stand out on resumes for CS students: 
        - Internships. 
        - **Team-based projects.**
            - Most jobs will require you work with a team. 
            - Mike really emphasized showing on your resume that you're capable of working on a team.
- Recruiter phone screening.
    - ~90% of resumes don't make it to this part, Mike said.
    - Mike admitted he's never been on that call, so he's not *entirely* sure how that works.
- Manager phone screening.
    - ~50% of candidates from previous step make it here, Mike said.
- Take home assignment & presentation.
    - ~50% of candidates from previous step make it here, Mike said. (If he doesn't find a suitable candidate in that pool, then he'll look at the other 50%.)
    - Mike said Proofpoint really cared about this part.
    - Mike said Proofpoint was looking at two things in this process:
        - Can you design a reasonable system?
        - More importantly: Can you talk about it? (Testing communication skills.)
    - What Mike said they would be looking for:
        - Design decisions.
        - Code decisions.
        - Memory/time tradeoffs.
    - Mike said he'll also throw in a few what-ifs. (Because that's how the real world works. They want to see that you're adaptable&mdash;both in your ability to think through and your ability to cope with it&mdash;because all the time in the real world your client will ask you to redo your design.)
- Technical interviews.
    - Vary.
    - Oft more than one interview. 
    - They'll ask ab your resume, your background, may have problem solving things.
    - Mike said he'll walk us through his interview, and let us take his interview.
        - QUESTION: Design a method that takes a string and returns the longest substring that appears more than once.
        - Follow-up questions:
            - What do you think the (Big O) order of your algorithm is?
                - Mike doesn't rly care what it is, but he wnats to know you understand what it is (to make sure you're not writing the slowest code imaginable).
                    - Especially at large scales, time & space complexity really matters.
                - Aside: The value of being here at college and getting your 
            - How would you test your algorithm?
                - (Bonus points if you tested )
                - Production code *has* to be tested, or there is no confidence in it.
            - Great. Now think outside the box for a bit. Come up with other approaches that may not work&mdash;just for the sake of conversation.
                - He wants to make sure you don't get locked in on your own solution and you're able to think of other ways to solve it.
                    - Mike's favorite employee, when asked to solve a problem, would always come back with at least three different solutions.
                - There's always more than one solution to a problem. Mike wants to know that, as an interviewer, you know that, too.
- Manager wrap up.

## Aside

It's way more expensive for a company to make a bad hire than no hire at all. (It's really a pain in the neck to kick someone out of the company.) So if there's any doubts, you'll most likely be booted from consideration.

Mike mentioned that right before he left Proofpoint, they hired a guy who was one of the smartest guys Mike'd ever met but couldn't work on the team, so they had to terminate him. (Teams are a force multiplier.) There were concerns before hiring him, but because the guy was so brilliant, they didn't pay attention to them as they should have. When they terminated him, the guy threatened legal action. (But Mike left right in the middle of that, so who knows if he followed through...)
