2025 09 22  
CS 291  
Zappalla  
MENTORING

# Mentoring

## Wtf is mentoring???

- A process whereby one with more exp helps one w/ less exp.
- A way to build a community of disciple scholars.
    - What we're all about here at BYU.
        - Our BYU community is not just those of us on campus rn, it also includes anyone who's ever graduated from BYU. 
    - Should be some compassion.

Can be profs, peers, advisors, coaches, employers, etc. Can be *anyone*. 

It's scary to ask for commitment. But from the perspective of the mentor: If all you're asking is for half hour of time once every month, that is chill. It's not as big of an ask as you might think it is.

Alumni love serving students, Zapalla says.

## Mentoring experiences

- One student said her Freshman year she would talk to a prof a lot after class. She ended up working w her as a TA, and it rly helped her feel like she could succeed at CS.
- One student said she had a room mate who happened to be in CS that gave her advice throughout her CS academia career. After her room mate went to pursue her PhD, she took over her job.

My experience: Miss Lake. 

## Can mentoring be mutually beneficial?

One student said yes: She says she learns best when she's teaching. Which is so true.

Another student said yes: He's a TA for CS 111, and it makes him feel good serving people. Said it has spiritual benefits as well.

Another student said yes: On her mission, she learned a whole lot more as a senior companion.

Zappalla talked ab how much character building being a Sunday school teacher for 11-yo boys was.

## Roles

### Things a mentor does

- Be a role model.
- Invite.
- Listen.
- Advocate.
    - Zappalla talked ab a TA he had that deserved a raise but was too shy to ask for it. So Zappalla took him up and 
- Advise & coach.
- Support.
- Connect to resources.

### Things a mentee does

- Express an interest.
    - Mentor can't read your mind. You have to communicate that you want them to mentor you.
- Establish a purpose.
    - An "ask". What is it that you would like the mentor to help you with?
    - Something achievable.
- Schedule a meeting.
    - You are in charge of scheduling to meet.
- Create a plan focused on goals.
- Work independently or under direction of mentor.
    - Usually you'd work independently to achieve your plan. But sometimes a mentor might be working more directly w/ you (e.g. you're a TA for their class).
- Persist.

## Mentoring values

Values to look for from your mentor and for yourself as a mentee.

- Humility: recognizing a need for help.
- Lifelong learning: dedication to growth as a disciple of Jesus Christ.
    - We're all in this together. We're all trying to be our best and improve. How can we both learn together?
- Faith: believing in our own capbility to grow and learn.
    - If you do not yet have a testimony of yourself as a child of God with a divine destiny in front of you, you should work on developing that testimony.
    - "I'm trying to fulfill my divine purpose" should motivate your seeking of a mentor.
- Integrity: follow through on commitments.
- Respect: valuing and honoring each other.
    - e.g. if your mentor does not make you feel good about yourself when you show him your code, you should probs find a new mentor.
    - Criticism should come from a positive place.



## Overlaps: Mentoring & Ministering

- Service.
- Spirit-guided.
    - Spirit should guide you when searching for a mentor and when applying advice given to you.


### Does employment-related mentoring bring people closer to Christ?

- "If ye have done it unto the least of your bretheren, ye have done it unto me.""
- One student noted it's related to how the church has self-reliance.
    - Alex bounced off of that: If our temporal needs are fulfilled, it's easier to fulfill our spiritual needs. 
        - Zappalla bounced off that: Our emotional needs need to be fulfilled too. e.g. it's really hard to feel the spirit when you're struggling with depression or anxiety.
- Zappalla said: All learning brings you closer to Jesus Christ.
    - All learning, all light comes from Jesus Christ.
    - "The glory of God is intelligence."

It's academic/career related, but Zappalla argues that's not distinct from spiritual related.

### Quote

*Think of [BYU] as a spiritual ecosystem. In teh spirit of the BoM allegory of the olive trees, teh Lord of the vineyard and his servants bring forth precious ffruit and strengthen each tree by binding together the strengths and weaknesses of all the trees. The Lord of the vineyard and his servants repeatedly ask, "What more can I do?" Together, they bless hearts and homes, [classrooms and workspaces], through inspired, consistent ministering [and mentoring].* Rephrased from Gerrit W. Gong, April 2023

Is there someone in your circle you should mentor?

## HOMEWORK: Find a mentor

- If you have contacts already (e.g. internship, CS job), consider starting there.
- If you want to broaden your circle.....
- LinkedIn: Search for a company on LinkedIn, look at its people. 
    - Aside: Zappalla said he knows a ton of people at Adobe, so he said he could always hook you up with an Adobe mentor.
    - Look at roles. 
    - Don't be shy. 
    - If you find someone who's a BYU alumni...bingo.
    - You can see your connections: you can anyone you're connected with who's connected with them as well. 

Homework assignment: Seek mentorship from someone and have an **"Informational Interview"** w/ someone.


### Information Interview

- NOT a job interview.
- KEY: CURIOSITY.
    - Have genuine curiosity.
    - Will lead to an authentically engaged curiosity.
    - You providing curiosity makes them curious about you.
- Gives you opportunities to see what type of work resonates with you, and what type of communities you want to be a part of.

1. Do your HW.
      1. Research LinkedIn or other online platforms to learn ab the professional you're interviewing.
2. Meet in person.
      1. Phone is OK, but face-to-face is best.
3. Always buy the coffee or lunch.
      1. Paying is a good way of showing your appreciation and making the connection.
4. Ask interviewee to recommend you other people to talk with.
5. Send a thank you note.
      1. Email is OK, but a hand written note is even better.

If they ask you to keep them updated on your progress, do so!


#### Example questions

- Can you describe your career path and key transitions?
- What's a typical day like in your role?
- Which skills are most valuable in your position?
- What trends are shaping your industry in 2025?
- How does your company use AI or automation?
- What do you wish you knew before starting this career?
- What are the biggest challenges employees face here?
- How is success measured in your role or company?
    - When you're getting evaluated each year as an employee, what are you being evaluated on?
- What advice would you give someone starting out in this field?
- Is there anyone else you'd recommend I connect with?
    - The professional you're interviewing may have been in the industry for so long they don't even remember starting out too well&mdash;or their experience is barely relevant for the industry today.
- Tell me about your values and how that fits in with your work.
    - What is it that you value and how do you find that in the work you're doing.

### Scheduling difficulties

There's no late penalty for this class. So don't worry if scheduling conflicts means you can't complete this assignment before next week, when it's due.