2025 09 08  
CS 291  
Daniel Zappalla  
DAY ONE: INTRO

# Clubs & Events

BYU DEV CLUB OPENING SOCIAL: Thurs Sep. 11 7 PM @ TNRB 240. Good for finding jobs & internships. (They're currently in talks w/ Adobe to bring them for networking).

Women in CS Opening Social: Sep 10 5-6 PM @ WSC 3290. 

CS Belonging Office: TMCB 1118. IDE Crash Course this week (Sep 8 - 12). Stop by for a few mins to get some IDE tips. (Open to all students.)

Kick-off for Animation program: Sep 11 11:30AM - 5PM, out somewhere in Springville.

Meet the Labs Day (Career Services Event): Tues. Sep 16 @ EB Event Space.

# Prof Info

Daniel Zappalla

## Zappalla's Life story

Raised Catholic. Never heard ab the LDS church until college. Eventually asked missionaries to give him discussions. 

He said his **journey of learning about the church was a journy of learning how to recognize & recieve revelation for hisself**.

Socially, he was converted p quick&mdash;he his new church friends. Intellectually, he was converted&mdash;he was a nerd, he said, and after studying Mormon theology convinced himself it was God's doctrine. But he hadn't been converted spiritually. 

Later, the missionaries taught him how to pray and how to receive answers. He also committed to reading the BoM in its entirety. Finally, he prayed in his rented room ab whether the BoM was true. He said he received his first revelation for himself then: it was true. He said it was personal.

His parents freaked out when he told him. They directed him to a Catholic priest that was versed in anti-Mormon literature. But Zappalla had prayed, and he knew for himself what truth he had received from God. So it really didn't matter what they were telling him. There wasn't any way he could turn his back on his truth. 

Many years later, he learned/realized you can actually pray about things like schooling and your career. (He thought you should only pray about "spiritual things", not knowing that schooling/career is spiritual.) So he learned to incorporate the gospel into all aspects of his life.

Came to teach here at BYU. (Interviewed twice. Said the first time he didn't know BYU's mission and bombed, but then the next time he did know its mission and got the job. Also said that he prayed the second time before the interview and felt that BYU was indeed the best place to be.)

Pray about everything. Don't forget about the preparation step, of course. But involve the spirit in every aspect of what you're doing. (If this is the only message you take from this class, Zappalla said, that's probably the best thing to take away.)

## Career Advisor

NEW! They just hired a *career* advisor for the CS department. (Lynette is an *academic* advisor&mdash;this is different.) His name is Vaugner.

Vaugner has >20 yrs experience w/ software development, architecture, etc. at many different companies (including Google). He says he wants to be a guide to us throughout our entire journey. **Think about *career*, not just *job*.**

Vaugner also designed an AI system that can review your resume (which will be used for one of the assignments in this class). 

# Class Info

This is the FIRST time this class has ever been taught. (WOAH!) (Fun fact: the idea for this class originated 2 yrs. ago&mdash;that's how long it takes to make a class @ BYU!)

This class is required for all CS students (now).

This class is coming just at the right time&mdash;CS jobs are becoming harder to find.

**This class is meant to prepare you for careers in Computer Science**. It is intended for CS Sophomores, but doesn't truly matter.

Learning outcomes:

- Career Exploration
    - Understand what options you have for your career.
- Career Preparation
    - Getting ready to have a job.
- Workplace Preparation
    - Understanding what duties & skills are required for diff roles in the workplace.

## Assignments

- Class attendance.
    - 100% expected.
        - Reach out if something happens, and Zappalla will work to make accommodations w/ you.
    - You mark your own attendance.
- HW assignments.
    - Practicing networking
    - Resume
    - Mentoring relationships
    - Mock interviews
    - Personal portfolios
- Reading essay.
    - Read a book ab careers in computing. 
    - (You won't be required to read the whole book)
    - There are multiple books to choose from.
- Student ratings.
    - (required)
    - Anonymous.
- Course survey.
    - Zappalla's own.
    - Anonymous.

### Grading

0.5 credits. Pass/fail. A passing grade is earned by completing all assignments.

All assignment are given full credit if it's clear the student earnestly engaged w/ the assignment.

# Let's begin

## Networking

Zappalla didn't sugar coat it: The job market rn is the WORST it's ever been during his time here at BYU. 

Pre-COVID, he would've said all you need to do is barrel through the program and you'd have a 98% chance of getting a job. Back then, the advice was to reject your first job&mdash;you should wait for multiple offers to come through.

That is not the case now. The market is much tighter. 

The piece of advice everyone in the industry gives Zappalla: The way to get a job is not to take your resume and throw it at an automated submission system with a automated AI screener. What you need to do is foster connections and get to know people.

You're an introvert? You can still learn this skill. Zappalla noted how he used to be a super introvert, until he was forced to be an extrovert when he joined the church (he was called to be an Elder's Quorum president). So Zappalla said, as he knows from his experience, if you pray and work hard at it, you can fool people to believing you are an extrovert even through you're not.     

## Career Fair

Some guy named Reynolds talked to us about the BYU career fair.

Why would you care? Because&mdash;this is perfect chance for networking!!!

How to find: Google "BYU career fair" > "Fall career fair" OR "STEM career fair" > "See which employers are coming" > STEM (at the top)

You will now see a list of STEM companies coming to the career fair. Google these to figure out which one looks/sounds nice. Zappalla said not to go blind into talking to a company. (Google is your friend.) 

Reynolds recommended using "glassdoor" to learn about internships. (e.g. does Lucid Software offer paid or unpaid internships? He looked up "glassdoor lucid software internships.")

**If you can't make it to the career fair, on the same page you can click on "See Employer Information Here" to see when they're having free lunches or stuff like that.**

Reynolds also said to convert from salary to hourly: Divide by 1000 and cut in half. e.g. 45K/yr is ~20/hr.

Reynolds says you shouldn't have the mindset of "lying about you so that you can get a job" and more of "find which job you're the perfect glove for."

Dallin asked ab dress. Reynolds recommended business casual. (He said that CS people tend to fear suits&mdash;lmao.)