2025 10 06  
CS 291  
David Zappalla  
Jacob Lunscock

# Mentorship update

Zappalla asked how many of us had successfully found mentors. It looked like from raise of hands that very few had. 

The more people you know, the higher the chance you'll find someone to mentor you.

Getting out of your comfort zone is good

# Guest: Jacob Lunscock

Chief tech officer for a company called UI Charitable.

Jacob says he's more of a business student than a CS student, but he did study CS...although he never finished his degree because he was much better at networking than he was at school.

Jacob threw out there: How many of you who got interviews remember the name of your hiring manager? He reminded us that hiring managers are our stepping block into a job. So it's important to know/remember them.

## About Jacob

Jacob joined UI Charitable back when it was a start-up. It has since raised $900M in charitable funds.

Causes: Anything from feeding Africa to planting in Hawaii. 

Jacob works on the tech side: His goal is to make it as easy as possible to donate any asset. (It's much easier to donate things than to sell.) Jacob tries to make donations of *anything* possible within three clicks. (There's over 1200 other companies aiming to do what they're doing, but they've managed to make it faster (and, Jacob argues, better), and they're the second fastest growing )

History: Loved cybersecurity at first. Got kicked out of school for hacking into security cameras. Then went on a mission to Tonga. (Island of 60 people. Was totally bored.) Left after 11 months: he contacted Australia & New Zealand government for water tanks (bc there was no clean water), and spent the next 11-ish months helping distribute those (or smth). That was the most meaningful experience of his life, so he decided to merge charity/service with his interest in tech.

Non-profit =/= not profitable. Non-profit means your company has no equity.

Bad at school, good at networking? Jacob said it started in middle school, when he had a bully who he wanted to make a friend. He pirated the book *How To Win Friends and Influence People* (he assured us he has since bought it). Fast-forward and he married the guy's little sister. 

How did he get good at networking (aside from book)? Practice, he said. He encourages people to take one big risk each day. (He said for him it stems from adrenaline-induced sports.)

All of Jacob's successes he says were made possible by people smarter than him. He was just in the right place at the right time to help out; and he was there bc of his networking. 

Jacob's a political advisor to Senator John Curtis.

## Making Connections

Why do people make connections?

Everyone gets TONS of emails a day. Trying to get a job via email is very very unlikely.

You are 5x more likely to get a job through a referral vs. traditional job application.

Jose asked the question: What happens if you mess up in your first impression with someone? Jacob responded: Play to your strengths. For Jacob, his strengths is that he's good at 1-on-1 conversations and is good at appreciating what other people enjoy doing in their freetime. So...focus on that ig? Idk.

Jacob talked about his time as a window-washer for a company he started in high school. He managed to end up washing windows at a bunch of wealthy homes. It gave him the opportunity to connect with people who had been highly successful. Through window washing, Jacob was able to connect with a group of 12 people as mentors. 13 years later, he still talks to them.

Finding your own mentor is huge. Jacob said that's the best challenge a professor could ever give you. FIND A MENTOR. FIND AS MANY AS YOU CAN. 

## Mentoring as a system

Jacob asked us to come up with three names.

1. Someone you admire.
    - Hideo Kojima (lmao).
    - Jacob Crandall (BYU prof).
    - Lee Jensen (BYU prof).
    - Dallin Wright.
    - Alex. (wait I forgot his lastname wtf.)
2. Someone you can help.
    - Robby. (For CS 235.)
3. Someone you can learn from.
    - Paris Egbert? Idk.
    - Lee Jensen (BYU prof).

You don't have to know the names you list, Jacob said. The sky's the limit here. 

People often think, "I'll never be able to connect with that person, they're too high profile!" But in truth sometimes higher profile people can be *easier* to connect with bc they often have assistants that help them connect with people. You just have to figure out how to get your foot in the door with those assistants.

Jacob says repeating this process over and over again all the time will help you a lot.

### Nodes of connections

Jacob showed us a web of nodes that he had his assistant make. (It was made in Obsidian.)

Nodes included companies, people who worked at those companies, what those people like to do, etc. etc.

## What Jacob looks for in interviews

Jacob has hired ~350 people in the course of the last 5 years. So he's had to nail down his hiring process bc it takes a ton of time.

### Questions

These *are* ordered.

1. Do they fit culturally.
2. Does their "life" situation fit for a long enough period of time?
3. Do their skills fit?
4. Does their ambition fit?
5. Does their personality fit? 
6. Does their level of competency and intelligence fit?
7. Do their ethics/worldview fit?
8. Does their money expectation fit?
9.  Etc. etc. etc.

The latter questions are ones that you can't legally directly ask, but you're trying to glean anyway.

These are "nontypical" things from normal employment seeking processes. If you don't do it right they can be illegal in today's world. Here are some of the ways I go about it...

1. What birth order? (Describe your family of origin.)
2. Where'd you grow up?
3. Where did you serve a mission?
4. What role models did related to work. (What occupation daddy had, did momy work?)
5. Moved around growing up or all in one place?
6. Grades?
7. Tell me one school experience in your life where you cheated at something.
    - You can see it right in their face when they ask that question. Most of the time, they actually tell him bc it catches them off guard. (Which is what he wants. He wants someone to tell him when they crash his database, or sleep in, or other things they wouldn't normally tell someone.)
8. Where do they live now (apt, roomies, spouse)?
9. When does your "significant other" get done with school/whatever (as in, when are you jammin' from Provo)?
10. SOmething looking for any kind of sales experiences, dealing w/ public experiences, negotiating experiences, any "personality toughness" issues, how they like/don't like that stuff.
11. Getting a feel for their "spoiledness"...how they were raised, do they have debt now, how much, how they view money, etc...are they workers, high personal responsibility, or whiners?
12. How much of their school they paid for (as in tell me factually ALL the jobs you have held since starting college, summer and while in school...work history during college, full history, scholarship history, and grades.)
13. Do they own a laptop or at least a PC of their own.

^ Doesn't usually ask these questions outright. But he'll oft be able to glean it.

Candidates & employees will stick around a lot longer if they have to put in a lot more work to get their position. e.g. Jacob's had candidates who were brilliant that he hired day 1 that didn't stick around too long because, he alleges, he didn't make it hard enough to get into the door. (I wonder how true that is.)

## How to make the most out of networking connections you do have

Jacob says most of his friends are old (like, 70 yrs old), but he really likes spending time with them. He gave an example of a friend he has who mountain bikes, which he does, too. Except for this man, most of his friends (who are his age) can't 

What to say? Feel it in the moment. For Jacob, with this friend, it would be smth like, "Hey, person X you mentioned, I bet they could make a difference in my life. Can I meet them some time?"

## Why come here today?

A student asked this.

Jacob said he came because he didn't get this in school. In truth, he was really disappointed by his educational experience. He felt he was taught everything he needed to know *except* what he needed to know to survive in the real world.

## Best opportunities to meet people to network?

A student asked this. Jacob asked the student what he liked to do. The student said video games. Jacob noted that he himself is in a lot of gaming Discords. Think of all the networking opportunities there.

## Brandon Fugal

<!-- - Likes to spend time in Hawaii. -->

Jacob is trying to connect with Brandon Fugal through his 70-year-old mountain biker friend. Right now, he's gleaning all the info he can from his friend about Brandon. It'd be really easy for him to ask his friend to introduce him to Brandon, but he's waiting for the right moment to ask, and he's waiting to have enough information on Brandon to make that connection successful.

## How do you overcome fear?

Do scary stuff every single day. Take big risks. Get used to fear.

Coming here and speaking to us was scary for Jacob. He's best at 1-on-1, not talking to a class. 

## How to use info you have on someone?

Don't use *every* detail. That'd be creepy. 

## How to find information on someone?

Be resourceful, Jacob said. You can oft find someone's email if you have their name. Jacob does as much research as possible on someone he wants to talk to.