2025 09 15  
CS 291  
David Zappala  


# Jared Yarn: Lucid

At the career fair: LUCID.

lucid.co/careers

Jared Yarn is the VP of Engineering @ Lucid.

Lucid is the only job he's ever had outside of school. He joined when it waas a small start up and has been there since (11 years and counting).

BS in CS from BYU.

Lucid now has 1000+ employes across 5 offices.

## Hiring Truths


### Companies do NOT want to hire the wrong employee

"Hire right, because the penalties of hiring wrong are huge." - idk

"I'd rather interview 50 people and not hire anyone than hire the wrong person." - Jeff Bezos

"The secret of my success is that we have gone to exceptional lengths to hire the best people in the world" - Steve Jobs

### Hard truths

1. Companies optimize to prevent false positives.
2. You will be prepped for some interviews...and not for others.
      1. It's a numbers game. This is part of why you should apply around.
3. Even though you are an "A-player", you may get passed over.

### Good truths

1. People want you!
2. Software Engineers are still in high demand.
3. Once you have an offer in hand, know that the company is eager to have you join their team.
      1. You are now in the drivers seat. You have the power now. Negotiation may begin. (We'll talk more about this later in class.)

### Interview tip

Interview tip: Ask the interviewer. Interviewers have a quota to meet of applications &rarr; interviews & passing interviews &rarr; accepted offers. So, most of the time, if you ask an interviewer or a recruiter ab the interview, they'll tell you way too much. 

(This kinda reminds me of what Dad told me&mdash;keep the interviewer talking.)

## What to look for in a company

Company culture: Get a feel for the company by going and looking at their "About Us" page and noting what they tout as their core values, or their founders' story, etc. (Then follow up w/ an employee if you can to make sure those values are fr.)

Looking at the pictures a company posts on their website can also give you an idea of what that company's like.

Yarn really cared about finding a company where people are passionate about the company's mission. He would always ask employees at companies: "What are you working on in your job?" And see if they're excited to talk about it. 

## Resume

### Resume

Because AI is a trend now: Tailor your resume to the company. Include keywords that the company uses.

- Clean, concise, organized, and one page!
    - No one reads the second page.
- Don't forget the personal information!!
    - Email and phone number.
    - LinkedIn and portfolio/other academic social links.
        - Pro tip: You can make a personal URL on LinkedIn so it looks more professional.
    - Address: City & State ONLY.
- Content sections:
    - Education and Certifications.
        - Include GPA.
            - Definitely include it if it's really good.
            - If it's not that good, include the better between your major GPA and your company GPA.
            - If you don't include it: Most companies will either ask for it (to see if it's bad) or toss your resume (bc they assume it's bad).
            - What counts as a good GPA depends on the company. 
                - Generally, 3.6 GPA is p amazing, but it varies pretty wildly.
    - Professional Experience.
        - Include all internships and full time employement.
    - Project/Coursework and Publications.
        - Ideally projects outside of school.
        - Def include projects outside of school...but if possible include how you went above and beyond the project requirements.
    - Volunteer Experience.
        - Especially if you're applying to jobs that recruit specifically from BYU.
- Anything that sets you apart that leads to the interviewer to ask questions ab you is good.   
    - Yarn told the story about one of his friends that included "Winner of international jump roper competition" or smth, and he was always asked about that in his job interviews, and it sets him apart.

### Action/Tool/Impact

- Action
    - Be specific to you. Some people put the general action of their project, and then during the interview they're busy trying to pick apart whether that was you or your team. 
- Tool
- Impact & numbers
    - If you don't have numbers, focus on the problem you built your project to solve.

Good example:

*Transferred data from Microsoft Excel to SQL and R to reduce time and streamline analysis.*

Better example:

*<u>Led the team initiative to transition</u> from <u>Microsoft Excel to SQL and R</u>, resulting in a <u>50% reduction in time to conduct data analysis.</u>*

### Resume Content 

- No more than 2 sentences/lines per bullet point.
    - Limit bullet points under each sections.
- **Impact** should be your main focus summarizing your experience.
    - Focus on the **why**, not just the what.
    - Responsibilities are a *secondary* focus.
- Point to your achievements.
- Use quantitive data as much as possible. (Numbers, probabilities, etc.)
- Customize your resume w/ appropriate "buzzwords" from the job description.
    - Shows you are a good fit for the company.
- Use good grammar and keep the same voice through the resume.
    - Use punctuation.
    - Shows a lack of attention to detail if you don't. Bad grammar is the #1 way to get your resume immediately thrown out.
- AVOID FLUFF.
    - Keep it concise.
    - Punch, to the point, exactly what you want to communicate.
- Density:
    - Do have *some* whitespace so that it doesn't look like a giant block of text.
- Color does not matter. Most applicator tracker systems upload your PDF to black & white.  

### Resume Distribution

Three ways to distribute resumes at the career fair:

- Have prepared a PDF accessible on your phone to upload..
- Upload your resume to Handshake and select to "Make it visible."
- Printed copies to hand out.
    - Don't do this nowadays lmao. Most companies at career fairs do not take paper copies of resumes...and many of those that do only do it to be polite.

### References

Someone asked how often employers often call references.

Yarn said that for junior positions, very rarely. But for senior positions, very often.

## Career Fair

### The Opening Pitch

Most career fair interactions go like this: 

You stand in line (some lines longer than other), you get to the front. You'll probably shake their hand. 

Then, you have 15 seconds to make an impression. This is the opening pitch. Here's some tips:

- Who are you? 
    - Name, specialty. 
    - Get to the point. No more than one sentence or two.
- What do you do?
    - Skills, experience. Get to the point.
- Why are we talking?
    - Role, passion. Get to the point.
    - Yarn likes to end with a question, so as to set up for a conversation.
        - Avoid vague questions. They're better than nothing, but...they're still pretty poop.
        - Avoid asking about pay. There's a respectful time & place & way to ask about that...and the career fair is probably not it.

Your goal: Get through the pitch as QUICKLY as possible so you can get to the conversation.

EXAMPLE:

*My name is Jared, I'm a CS major in my senior year. I've taken classes in Database and Computer Networking. Last summer I did an internship w/ TechCo working on their backend Distributions team. I'm interested in your Software Engineer 1 role. I saw Lucid has a core value of Passion and Excellence. Can you tell me a little about how new engineers at your company demonstrate passion?*

Most of the time, you'll want to respect the person's time, so typiycally don't talk longer than like 15-20 mins.